FIGURE 14.4 In Hershey and Chase's experiments, bacteria were infected with phage radiolabeled with either 35S, which labels protein, or
32P, which labels DNA. Only 32P entered the bacterial cells, indicating that DNA is the genetic material.
Around this same time, Austrian biochemist Erwin Chargaff examined the content of DNA in different species and
found that the amounts of adenine, thymine, guanine, and cytosine were not found in equal quantities, and that
relative concentrations of the four nucleotide bases varied from species to species, but not within tissues of the
same individual or between individuals of the same species. He also discovered something unexpected: That the
amount of adenine equaled the amount of thymine, and the amount of cytosine equaled the amount of guanine (that
is, A = T and G = C). Different species had equal amounts of purines (A+G) and pyrimidines (T + C), but different
ratios of A+T to G+C. These observations became known as Chargaff’s rules. Chargaff's findings proved immensely
useful when Watson and Crick were getting ready to propose their DNA double helix model! You can see after
reading the past few pages how science builds upon previous discoveries, sometimes in a slow and laborious
process.
14.2 DNA Structure and Sequencing
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
•
Describe the structure of DNA
•
Explain the Sanger method of DNA sequencing
•
Discuss the similarities and differences between eukaryotic and prokaryotic DNA
The building blocks of DNA are nucleotides. The important components of the nucleotide are a nitrogenous
(nitrogen-bearing) base, a 5-carbon sugar (pentose), and a phosphate group (Figure 14.5). The nucleotide is named
depending on the nitrogenous base. The nitrogenous base can be a purine such as adenine (A) and guanine (G), or a
pyrimidine such as cytosine (C) and thymine (T).
14.2 • DNA Structure and Sequencing
367


VISUAL CONNECTION
FIGURE 14.5 The purines have a double ring structure with a six-membered ring fused to a five-membered ring. Pyrimidines are smaller in
size; they have a single six-membered ring structure.
The images above illustrate the five bases of DNA and RNA. Examine the images and explain why these are called
“nitrogenous bases.” How are the purines different from the pyrimidines? How is one purine or pyrimidine different
from another, e.g., adenine from guanine? How is a nucleoside different from a nucleotide?
The purines have a double ring structure with a six-membered ring fused to a five-membered ring. Pyrimidines are
smaller in size; they have a single six-membered ring structure.
The sugar is deoxyribose in DNA and ribose in RNA. The carbon atoms of the five-carbon sugar are numbered 1', 2',
3', 4', and 5' (1' is read as “one prime”). The phosphate, which makes DNA and RNA acidic, is connected to the 5'
carbon of the sugar by the formation of an ester linkage between phosphoric acid and the 5'-OH group (an ester is
an acid + an alcohol). In DNA nucleotides, the 3' carbon of the sugar deoxyribose is attached to a hydroxyl (OH)
group. In RNA nucleotides, the 2' carbon of the sugar ribose also contains a hydroxyl group. The base is attached to
the 1'carbon of the sugar.
The nucleotides combine with each other to produce phosphodiester bonds. The phosphate residue attached to the
5' carbon of the sugar of one nucleotide forms a second ester linkage with the hydroxyl group of the 3' carbon of the
sugar of the next nucleotide, thereby forming a 5'-3' phosphodiester bond. In a polynucleotide, one end of the chain
has a free 5' phosphate, and the other end has a free 3'-OH. These are called the 5' and 3' ends of the chain. A base
attached to a five-carbon sugar represents a nucleoside. A nucleotide is composed of one, two, or three phosphate
groups attached to a nucleoside.
In the 1950s, Francis Crick and James Watson worked together to determine the structure of DNA at the University
of Cambridge, England. Other scientists like Linus Pauling and Maurice Wilkins were also actively exploring this field.
Pauling previously had discovered the secondary structure of proteins using X-ray crystallography. In Wilkins’ lab,
researcher Rosalind Franklin was using X-ray diffraction methods to understand the structure of DNA. Watson and
Crick were able to piece together the puzzle of the DNA molecule on the basis of Franklin's data because Crick had
also studied X-ray diffraction (Figure 14.6). In 1962, James Watson, Francis Crick, and Maurice Wilkins were
awarded the Nobel Prize in Medicine. Unfortunately, by then Franklin had died, and Nobel prizes are not awarded
posthumously.
368
14 • DNA Structure and Function
Access for free at openstax.org


FIGURE 14.6 The X-ray diffraction pattern of DNA, which helped to elucidate its double-helix structure.
Watson and Crick proposed that DNA is made up of two strands that are twisted around each other to form a right-
handed helix. Base pairing takes place between a purine and pyrimidine on opposite strands, so that A pairs with T,
and G pairs with C (suggested by Chargaff's Rules). Thus, adenine and thymine are complementary base pairs, and
cytosine and guanine are also complementary base pairs. The base pairs are stabilized by hydrogen bonds: adenine
and thymine form two hydrogen bonds and cytosine and guanine form three hydrogen bonds. The two strands are
anti-parallel in nature; that is, the 3' end of one strand faces the 5' end of the other strand. The sugar and phosphate
of the nucleotides form the backbone of the structure, whereas the nitrogenous bases are stacked inside, like the
rungs of a ladder. Each base pair is separated from the next base pair by a distance of 0.34 nm, and each turn of the
helix measures 3.4 nm. Therefore, 10 base pairs are present per turn of the helix. The diameter of the DNA double-
helix is 2 nm, and it is uniform throughout. Only the pairing between a purine and pyrimidine and the antiparallel
orientation of the two DNA strands can explain the uniform diameter. The twisting of the two strands around each
other results in the formation of uniformly spaced major and minor grooves (Figure 14.7).
FIGURE 14.7 DNA has (a) a double helix structure and (b) phosphodiester bonds; the dotted lines between Thymine and Adenine and
Guanine and Cytosine represent hydrogen bonds. The (c) major and minor grooves are binding sites for DNA binding proteins during
processes such as transcription (the copying of RNA from DNA) and replication.
DNA Sequencing Techniques
Until the 1990s, the sequencing of DNA (reading the sequence of DNA) was a relatively expensive and long process.
Using radiolabeled nucleotides also compounded the problem through safety concerns. With currently available
technology and automated machines, the process is cheaper, safer, and can be completed in a matter of hours. Fred
Sanger developed the sequencing method used for the human genome sequencing project, which is widely used
today (Figure 14.8).
14.2 • DNA Structure and Sequencing
369


LINK TO LEARNING
Visit this site (https://openstax.org/l/DNA_sequencing) to watch a video explaining the DNA sequence-reading
technique that resulted from Sanger’s work.
The sequencing method is known as the dideoxy chain termination method. The method is based on the use of
chain terminators, the dideoxynucleotides (ddNTPs). The ddNTPs differ from the deoxynucleotides by the lack of a
free 3' OH group on the five-carbon sugar. If a ddNTP is added to a growing DNA strand, the chain cannot be
extended any further because the free 3' OH group needed to add another nucleotide is not available. By using a
predetermined ratio of deoxynucleotides to dideoxynucleotides, it is possible to generate DNA fragments of
different sizes.
FIGURE 14.8 In Frederick Sanger's dideoxy chain termination method, dye-labeled dideoxynucleotides are used to generate DNA
fragments that terminate at different points. The DNA is separated by capillary electrophoresis on the basis of size, and from the order of
fragments formed, the DNA sequence can be read. The DNA sequence readout is shown on an electropherogram that is generated by a
laser scanner.
The DNA sample to be sequenced is denatured (separated into two strands by heating it to high temperatures). The
DNA is divided into four tubes in which a primer, DNA polymerase, and all four nucleoside triphosphates (A, T, G, and
C) are added. In addition, limited quantities of one of the four dideoxynucleoside triphosphates (ddCTP, ddATP,
ddGTP, and ddTTP) are added to each tube respectively. The tubes are labeled as A, T, G, and C according to the
ddNTP added. For detection purposes, each of the four dideoxynucleotides carries a different fluorescent label.
Chain elongation continues until a fluorescent dideoxy nucleotide is incorporated, after which no further elongation
takes place. After the reaction is over, electrophoresis is performed. Even a difference in length of a single base can
be detected. The sequence is read from a laser scanner that detects the fluorescent marker of each fragment. For
his work on DNA sequencing, Sanger received a Nobel Prize in Chemistry in 1980.
LINK TO LEARNING
Sanger’s genome sequencing has led to a race to sequence human genomes at rapid speed and low cost. Learn
more by viewing the animation here (https://openstax.org/l/DNA_and_genomes).
Gel electrophoresis is a technique used to separate DNA fragments of different sizes. Usually the gel is made of a
chemical called agarose (a polysaccharide polymer extracted from seaweed that is high in galactose residues).
Agarose powder is added to a buffer and heated. After cooling, the gel solution is poured into a casting tray. Once
the gel has solidified, the DNA is loaded on the gel and electric current is applied. The DNA has a net negative charge
and moves from the negative electrode toward the positive electrode. The electric current is applied for sufficient
time to let the DNA separate according to size; the smallest fragments will be farthest from the well (where the DNA
was loaded), and the heavier molecular weight fragments will be closest to the well. Once the DNA is separated, the
gel is stained with a DNA-specific dye for viewing it (Figure 14.9).
370
14 • DNA Structure and Function
Access for free at openstax.org


FIGURE 14.9 DNA can be separated on the basis of size using gel electrophoresis. (credit: James Jacob, Tompkins Cortland Community
College)
EVOLUTION CONNECTION
Neanderthal Genome: How Are We Related?
The first draft sequence of the Neanderthal genome was recently published by Richard E. Green et al. in 2010.1
Neanderthals are the closest ancestors of present-day humans. They were known to have lived in Europe and
Western Asia (and now, perhaps, in Northern Africa) before they disappeared from fossil records approximately
30,000 years ago. Green’s team studied almost 40,000-year-old fossil remains that were selected from sites across
the world. Extremely sophisticated means of sample preparation and DNA sequencing were employed because of
the fragile nature of the bones and heavy microbial contamination. In their study, the scientists were able to
sequence some four billion base pairs. The Neanderthal sequence was compared with that of present-day humans
from across the world. After comparing the sequences, the researchers found that the Neanderthal genome had 2 to
3 percent greater similarity to people living outside Africa than to people in Africa. While current theories have
suggested that all present-day humans can be traced to a small ancestral population in Africa, the data from the
Neanderthal genome suggest some interbreeding between Neanderthals and early modern humans.
Green and his colleagues also discovered DNA segments among people in Europe and Asia that are more similar to
Neanderthal sequences than to other contemporary human sequences. Another interesting observation was that
Neanderthals are as closely related to people from Papua New Guinea as to those from China or France. This is
surprising because Neanderthal fossil remains have been located only in Europe and West Asia. Most likely, genetic
exchange took place between Neanderthals and modern humans as modern humans emerged out of Africa, before
the divergence of Europeans, East Asians, and Papua New Guineans.
Several genes seem to have undergone changes from Neanderthals during the evolution of present-day humans.
These genes are involved in cranial structure, metabolism, skin morphology, and cognitive development. One of the
genes that is of particular interest is RUNX2, which is different in modern day humans and Neanderthals. This gene
is responsible for the prominent frontal bone, bell-shaped rib cage, and dental differences seen in Neanderthals. It
is speculated that an evolutionary change in RUNX2 was important in the origin of modern-day humans, and this
affected the cranium and the upper body.
LINK TO LEARNING
Watch Svante Pääbo’s talk (https://openstax.org/l/neanderthal) explaining the Neanderthal genome research at the
2011 annual TED (Technology, Entertainment, Design) conference.
DNA Packaging in Cells
Prokaryotes are much simpler than eukaryotes in many of their features (Figure 14.10). Most prokaryotes contain a
1
Richard E. Green et al., “A Draft Sequence of the Neandertal Genome,” Science 328 (2010): 710-22.
14.2 • DNA Structure and Sequencing
371


single, circular chromosome that is found in an area of the cytoplasm called the nucleoid region.
VISUAL CONNECTION
FIGURE 14.10 A eukaryote contains a well-defined nucleus, whereas in prokaryotes, the chromosome lies in the cytoplasm in an area
called the nucleoid.
In eukaryotic cells, DNA and RNA synthesis occur in a separate compartment from protein synthesis. In prokaryotic
cells, both processes occur together. What advantages might there be to separating the processes? What
advantages might there be to having them occur together?
The size of the genome in one of the most well-studied prokaryotes, E.coli, is 4.6 million base pairs (approximately
1.1 mm, if cut and stretched out). So how does this fit inside a small bacterial cell? The DNA is twisted by what is
known as supercoiling. Supercoiling suggests that DNA is either “under-wound” (less than one turn of the helix per
10 base pairs) or “over-wound” (more than 1 turn per 10 base pairs) from its normal relaxed state. Some proteins
are known to be involved in the supercoiling; other proteins and enzymes such as DNA gyrase help in maintaining
the supercoiled structure.
Eukaryotes, whose chromosomes each consist of a linear DNA molecule, employ a different type of packing strategy
to fit their DNA inside the nucleus (Figure 14.11). At the most basic level, DNA is wrapped around proteins known as
histones to form structures called nucleosomes. The histones are evolutionarily conserved proteins that are rich in
basic amino acids and form an octamer composed of two molecules of each of four different histones. Their
composition and properties are important to understanding gene expression, and were partially uncovered based on
research by Marie M. Daly and Alfred E. Mirsky in the early 1950s. The DNA (remember, it is negatively charged
because of the phosphate groups) is wrapped tightly around the histone core. This nucleosome is linked to the next
one with the help of a linker DNA. This is also known as the “beads on a string” structure. With the help of a fifth
histone, a string of nucleosomes is further compacted into a 30-nm fiber, which is the diameter of the structure.
Metaphase chromosomes are even further condensed by association with scaffolding proteins. At the metaphase
stage, the chromosomes are at their most compact, approximately 700 nm in width.
In interphase, eukaryotic chromosomes have two distinct regions that can be distinguished by staining. The tightly
packaged region is known as heterochromatin, and the less dense region is known as euchromatin.
Heterochromatin usually contains genes that are not expressed, and is found in the regions of the centromere and
telomeres. The euchromatin usually contains genes that are transcribed, with DNA packaged around nucleosomes
but not further compacted.
372
14 • DNA Structure and Function
Access for free at openstax.org