FIGURE 14.11 These figures illustrate the compaction of the eukaryotic chromosome.
14.3 Basics of DNA Replication
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
•
Explain how the structure of DNA reveals the replication process
•
Describe the Meselson and Stahl experiments
The elucidation of the structure of the double helix provided a hint as to how DNA divides and makes copies of itself.
In their 1953 paper, Watson and Crick penned an incredible understatement: "It has not escaped our notice that the
specific pairing we have postulated immediately suggests a possible copying mechanism for the genetic material."
With specific base pairs, the sequence of one DNA strand can be predicted from its complement. The double-helix
model suggests that the two strands of the double helix separate during replication, and each strand serves as a
template from which the new complementary strand is copied. What was not clear was how the replication took
place. There were three models suggested (Figure 14.12): conservative, semi-conservative, and dispersive.
14.3 • Basics of DNA Replication
373


FIGURE 14.12 The three suggested models of DNA replication. Gray indicates the original DNA strands, and blue indicates newly
synthesized DNA.
In conservative replication, the parental DNA remains together, and the newly formed daughter strands are
together. The semi-conservative method suggests that each of the two parental DNA strands acts as a template for
new DNA to be synthesized; after replication, each double-stranded DNA includes one parental or “old” strand and
one “new” strand. In the dispersive model, both copies of DNA have double-stranded segments of parental DNA
and newly synthesized DNA interspersed.
Meselson and Stahl were interested in understanding how DNA replicates. They grew E. coli for several generations
in a medium containing a “heavy” isotope of nitrogen (15N), which gets incorporated into nitrogenous bases, and
eventually into the DNA (Figure 14.13).
FIGURE 14.13 Meselson and Stahl experimented with E. coli grown first in heavy nitrogen (15N) then in 14N. DNA grown in 15N (red band) is
heavier than DNA grown in 14N (orange band), and sediments to a lower level in cesium chloride solution in an ultracentrifuge. When DNA
grown in 15N is switched to media containing 14N, after one round of cell division the DNA sediments halfway between the 15N and 14N
levels, indicating that it now contains fifty percent 14N. In subsequent cell divisions, an increasing amount of DNA contains 14N only. These
data support the semi-conservative replication model. (credit: modification of work by Mariana Ruiz Villareal)
374
14 • DNA Structure and Function
Access for free at openstax.org