LINK TO LEARNING
Review the full process of DNA replication here (https://openstax.org/l/replication_DNA).
14.5 DNA Replication in Eukaryotes
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
•
Discuss the similarities and differences between DNA replication in eukaryotes and prokaryotes
•
State the role of telomerase in DNA replication
Eukaryotic genomes are much more complex and larger in size than prokaryotic genomes. Eukaryotes also have a
number of different linear chromosomes. The human genome has 3 billion base pairs per haploid set of
chromosomes, and 6 billion base pairs are replicated during the S phase of the cell cycle. There are multiple origins
of replication on each eukaryotic chromosome; humans can have up to 100,000 origins of replication across the
genome. The rate of replication is approximately 100 nucleotides per second, much slower than prokaryotic
replication. In yeast, which is a eukaryote, special sequences known as autonomously replicating sequences (ARS)
are found on the chromosomes. These are equivalent to the origin of replication in E. coli.
The number of DNA polymerases in eukaryotes is much more than in prokaryotes: 14 are known, of which five are
known to have major roles during replication and have been well studied. They are known as pol α, pol β, pol γ, pol
δ, and pol ε.
The essential steps of replication are the same as in prokaryotes. Before replication can start, the DNA has to be
made available as a template. Eukaryotic DNA is bound to basic proteins known as histones to form structures
called nucleosomes. Histones must be removed and then replaced during the replication process, which helps to
account for the lower replication rate in eukaryotes. The chromatin (the complex between DNA and proteins) may
undergo some chemical modifications, so that the DNA may be able to slide off the proteins or be accessible to the
enzymes of the DNA replication machinery. At the origin of replication, a pre-replication complex is made with other
initiator proteins. Helicase and other proteins are then recruited to start the replication process (Table 14.2).
Difference between Prokaryotic and Eukaryotic Replication
Property
Prokaryotes
Eukaryotes
Origin of replication
Single
Multiple
Rate of replication
1000 nucleotides/s
50 to 100 nucleotides/s
DNA polymerase types
5
14
Telomerase
Not present
Present
RNA primer removal
DNA pol I
RNase H
Strand elongation
DNA pol III
Pol α, pol δ, pol ε
Sliding clamp
Sliding clamp
PCNA
TABLE 14.2
A helicase using the energy from ATP hydrolysis opens up the DNA helix. Replication forks are formed at each
replication origin as the DNA unwinds. The opening of the double helix causes over-winding, or supercoiling, in the
DNA ahead of the replication fork. These are resolved with the action of topoisomerases. Primers are formed by the
enzyme primase, and using the primer, DNA pol can start synthesis. Three major DNA polymerases are then
378
14 • DNA Structure and Function
Access for free at openstax.org


involved: α, δ and ε. DNA pol α adds a short (20 to 30 nucleotides) DNA fragment to the RNA primer on both
strands, and then hands off to a second polymerase. While the leading strand is continuously synthesized by the
enzyme pol ε, the lagging strand is synthesized by pol δ. A sliding clamp protein known as PCNA (proliferating cell
nuclear antigen) holds the DNA pol in place so that it does not slide off the DNA. As pol δ runs into the primer RNA
on the lagging strand, it displaces it from the DNA template. The displaced primer RNA is then removed by RNase H
(AKA flap endonuclease) and replaced with DNA nucleotides. The Okazaki fragments in the lagging strand are
joined after the replacement of the RNA primers with DNA. The gaps that remain are sealed by DNA ligase, which
forms the phosphodiester bond.
Telomere replication
Unlike prokaryotic chromosomes, eukaryotic chromosomes are linear. As you’ve learned, the enzyme DNA pol can
add nucleotides only in the 5' to 3' direction. In the leading strand, synthesis continues until the end of the
chromosome is reached. On the lagging strand, DNA is synthesized in short stretches, each of which is initiated by a
separate primer. When the replication fork reaches the end of the linear chromosome, there is no way to replace the
primer on the 5’ end of the lagging strand. The DNA at the ends of the chromosome thus remains unpaired, and over
time these ends, called telomeres, may get progressively shorter as cells continue to divide.
Telomeres comprise repetitive sequences that code for no particular gene. In humans, a six-base-pair sequence,
TTAGGG, is repeated 100 to 1000 times in the telomere regions. In a way, these telomeres protect the genes from
getting deleted as cells continue to divide. The telomeres are added to the ends of chromosomes by a separate
enzyme, telomerase (Figure 14.16), whose discovery helped in the understanding of how these repetitive
chromosome ends are maintained. The telomerase enzyme contains a catalytic part and a built-in RNA template. It
attaches to the end of the chromosome, and DNA nucleotides complementary to the RNA template are added on the
3' end of the DNA strand. Once the 3' end of the lagging strand template is sufficiently elongated, DNA polymerase
can add the nucleotides complementary to the ends of the chromosomes. Thus, the ends of the chromosomes are
replicated.
14.5 • DNA Replication in Eukaryotes
379


FIGURE 14.15 The ends of linear chromosomes are maintained by the action of the telomerase enzyme. Credit: Rao, A. and Fletcher, S.
Department of Biology, Texas A&M University.
Telomerase is typically active in germ cells and adult stem cells. It is not active in adult somatic cells. For their
discovery of telomerase and its action, Elizabeth Blackburn, Carol W. Greider, and Jack W. Szostak (Figure 14.16)
received the Nobel Prize for Medicine and Physiology in 2009. Later research using HeLa cells (obtained from
Henrietta Lacks) confirmed that telomerase is present in human cells. And in 2001, researchers including Diane L.
Wright found that telomerase is necessary for cells in human embryos to rapidly proliferate.
FIGURE 14.16 Elizabeth Blackburn, 2009 Nobel Laureate, is one of the scientists who discovered how telomerase works. (credit: US
Embassy Sweden)
380
14 • DNA Structure and Function
Access for free at openstax.org