Telomerase and Aging
Cells that undergo cell division continue to have their telomeres shortened because most somatic cells do not make
telomerase. This essentially means that telomere shortening is associated with aging. With the advent of modern
medicine, preventative health care, and healthier lifestyles, the human life span has increased, and there is an
increasing demand for people to look younger and have a better quality of life as they grow older.
In 2010, scientists found that telomerase can reverse some age-related conditions in mice. This may have potential
in regenerative medicine.2 Telomerase-deficient mice were used in these studies; these mice have tissue atrophy,
stem cell depletion, organ system failure, and impaired tissue injury responses. Telomerase reactivation in these
mice caused extension of telomeres, reduced DNA damage, reversed neurodegeneration, and improved the function
of the testes, spleen, and intestines. Thus, telomere reactivation may have potential for treating age-related
diseases in humans.
Cancer is characterized by uncontrolled cell division of abnormal cells. The cells accumulate mutations, proliferate
uncontrollably, and can migrate to different parts of the body through a process called metastasis. Scientists have
observed that cancerous cells have considerably shortened telomeres and that telomerase is active in these cells.
Interestingly, only after the telomeres were shortened in the cancer cells did the telomerase become active. If the
action of telomerase in these cells can be inhibited by drugs during cancer therapy, then the cancerous cells could
potentially be stopped from further division.
14.6 DNA Repair
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
•
Discuss the different types of mutations in DNA
•
Explain DNA repair mechanisms
DNA replication is a highly accurate process, but mistakes can occasionally occur, such as a DNA polymerase
inserting a wrong base. Uncorrected mistakes may sometimes lead to serious consequences, such as cancer. Repair
mechanisms correct the mistakes. In rare cases, mistakes are not corrected, leading to mutations; in other cases,
repair enzymes are themselves mutated or defective.
Most of the mistakes during DNA replication are promptly corrected by the proofreading ability of DNA polymerase
itself. (Figure 14.17). In proofreading, the DNA pol reads the newly added base before adding the next one, so a
correction can be made. The polymerase checks whether the newly added base has paired correctly with the base in
the template strand. If it is the right base, the next nucleotide is added. If an incorrect base has been added, the
enzyme makes a cut at the phosphodiester bond and releases the wrong nucleotide. This is performed by the 3'
exonuclease action of DNA pol. Once the incorrect nucleotide has been removed, it can be replaced by the correct
one.
FIGURE 14.17 Proofreading by DNA polymerase corrects errors during replication.
Some errors are not corrected during replication, but are instead corrected after replication is completed; this type
of repair is known as mismatch repair (Figure 14.18). Specific repair enzymes recognize the mispaired nucleotide
and excise part of the strand that contains it; the excised region is then resynthesized. If the mismatch remains
2
Jaskelioff et al., “Telomerase reactivation reverses tissue degeneration in aged telomerase-deficient mice,” Nature 469 (2011): 102-7.
14.6 • DNA Repair
381


uncorrected, it may lead to more permanent damage when the mismatched DNA is replicated. How do mismatch
repair enzymes recognize which of the two bases is the incorrect one? In E. coli, after replication, the nitrogenous
base adenine acquires a methyl group; the parental DNA strand will have methyl groups, whereas the newly
synthesized strand lacks them. Thus, DNA polymerase is able to remove the wrongly incorporated bases from the
newly synthesized, non-methylated strand. In eukaryotes, the mechanism is not very well understood, but it is
believed to involve recognition of unsealed nicks in the new strand, as well as a short-term continuing association of
some of the replication proteins with the new daughter strand after replication has completed.
FIGURE 14.18 In mismatch repair, the incorrectly added base is detected after replication. The mismatch repair proteins detect this base
and remove it from the newly synthesized strand by nuclease action. The gap is now filled with the correctly paired base.
Another type of repair mechanism, nucleotide excision repair, is similar to mismatch repair, except that it is used to
remove damaged bases rather than mismatched ones. The repair enzymes replace abnormal bases by making a cut
on both the 3' and 5' ends of the damaged base (Figure 14.19). The segment of DNA is removed and replaced with
the correctly paired nucleotides by the action of DNA pol. Once the bases are filled in, the remaining gap is sealed
with a phosphodiester linkage catalyzed by DNA ligase. This repair mechanism is often employed when UV exposure
causes the formation of pyrimidine dimers.
382
14 • DNA Structure and Function
Access for free at openstax.org


FIGURE 14.19 Nucleotide excision repairs thymine dimers. When exposed to UV light, thymines lying adjacent to each other can form
thymine dimers. In normal cells, they are excised and replaced. Credit: Rao, A., Fletcher, S. and Tag, A. Department of Biology, Texas A&M
University.
A well-studied example of mistakes not being corrected is seen in people suffering from xeroderma pigmentosa
(Figure 14.20). Affected individuals have skin that is highly sensitive to UV rays from the sun. When individuals are
exposed to UV light, pyrimidine dimers, especially those of thymine, are formed; people with xeroderma pigmentosa
are not able to repair the damage. These are not repaired because of a defect in the nucleotide excision repair
enzymes, whereas in normal individuals, the thymine dimers are excised and the defect is corrected. The thymine
dimers distort the structure of the DNA double helix, and this may cause problems during DNA replication. People
with xeroderma pigmentosa may have a higher risk of contracting skin cancer than those who don't have the
condition.
FIGURE 14.20 Xeroderma pigmentosa is a condition in which thymine dimerization from exposure to UV light is not repaired. Exposure to
sunlight results in skin lesions. (credit: James Halpern et al.)
14.6 • DNA Repair
383


Errors during DNA replication are not the only reason why mutations arise in DNA. Mutations, variations in the
nucleotide sequence of a genome, can also occur because of damage to DNA. Such mutations may be of two types:
induced or spontaneous. Induced mutations are those that result from an exposure to chemicals, UV rays, x-rays,
or some other environmental agent. For example, Charlotte Auerbach and J.M Robson discovered the mutation-
inducing effects of mustard gas. Spontaneous mutations occur without any exposure to any environmental agent;
they are a result of natural reactions taking place within the body.
Mutations may have a wide range of effects. Point mutations are those mutations that affect a single base pair. The
most common nucleotide mutations are substitutions, in which one base is replaced by another. These substitutions
can be of two types, either transitions or transversions. Transition substitution refers to a purine or pyrimidine
being replaced by a base of the same kind; for example, a purine such as adenine may be replaced by the purine
guanine. Transversion substitution refers to a purine being replaced by a pyrimidine, or vice versa; for example,
cytosine, a pyrimidine, is replaced by adenine, a purine. Some point mutations are not detectable in the final
product; these are known as silent mutations. Silent mutations are usually due to a substitution in the third base of a
codon, which often represents the same amino acid as the original codon. Other point mutations can result in the
replacement of one amino acid by another, which may alter the function of the protein. Point mutations that
generate a stop codon can terminate a protein early.
Some mutations can result in an increased number of copies of the same codon. These are called trinucleotide
repeat expansions and result in repeated regions of the same amino acid. Mutations can also be the result of the
addition of a base, known as an insertion, or the removal of a base, also known as deletion. If an insertion or
deletion results in the alteration of the translational reading frame (a frameshift mutation), the resultant protein is
usually nonfunctional. Sometimes a piece of DNA from one chromosome may get translocated to another
chromosome or to another region of the same chromosome; this is also known as translocation. These mutation
types are shown in Figure 14.21.
384
14 • DNA Structure and Function
Access for free at openstax.org


VISUAL CONNECTION
FIGURE 14.21 Mutations can lead to changes in the protein sequence encoded by the DNA.
A frameshift mutation that results in the insertion of three nucleotides is often less deleterious than a mutation that
results in the insertion of one nucleotide. Why?
Mutations in repair genes have been known to cause cancer. Many mutated repair genes have been implicated in
certain forms of pancreatic cancer, colon cancer, and colorectal cancer. Mutations can affect either somatic cells or
germ cells. If many mutations accumulate in a somatic cell, they may lead to problems such as the uncontrolled cell
division observed in cancer. If a mutation takes place in germ cells, the mutation will be passed on to the next
generation, as in the case of hemophilia and xeroderma pigmentosa.
14.6 • DNA Repair
385