INTRODUCTION
CHAPTER 15
Genes and Proteins
15.1 The Genetic Code
15.2 Prokaryotic Transcription
15.3 Eukaryotic Transcription
15.4 RNA Processing in Eukaryotes
15.5 Ribosomes and Protein Synthesis
Since the rediscovery of Mendel’s work in 1900, the definition of the gene has
progressed from an abstract unit of heredity to a tangible molecular entity capable of replication,
expression, and mutation (Figure 15.1). Genes are composed of DNA and are linearly arranged on
chromosomes. Genes specify the sequences of amino acids, which are the building blocks of
proteins. In turn, proteins are responsible for orchestrating nearly every function of the cell. Both
genes and the proteins they encode are absolutely essential to life as we know it.
15.1 The Genetic Code
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
•
Explain the “central dogma” of DNA-protein synthesis
•
Describe the genetic code and how the nucleotide sequence prescribes the amino acid and
the protein sequence
The cellular process of transcription generates messenger RNA (mRNA), a mobile molecular copy
of one or more genes with an alphabet of A, C, G, and uracil (U). Translation of the mRNA template
on ribosomes converts nucleotide-based genetic information into a protein product. That is the
central dogma of DNA-protein synthesis. Protein sequences consist of 20 commonly occurring
amino acids; therefore, it can be said that the protein alphabet consists of 20 “letters” (Figure
15.2). Different amino acids have different chemistries (such as acidic versus basic, or polar and
FIGURE 15.1 Genes, which are carried on (a) chromosomes, are linearly organized instructions for making the RNA
and protein molecules that are necessary for all of the processes of life. The (b) interleukin-2 protein and (c)
alpha-2u-globulin protein are just two examples of the array of different molecular structures that are encoded by
genes. (credit “chromosome: National Human Genome Research Institute; credit “interleukin-2”: Ramin Herati/
Created from PDB 1M47 and rendered with Pymol; credit “alpha-2u-globulin”: Darren Logan/rendered with AISMIG)
CHAPTER OUTLINE


nonpolar) and different structural constraints. Variation in amino acid sequence is responsible for
the enormous variation in protein structure and function.
FIGURE 15.2 Structures of the 20 amino acids found in proteins are shown. Each amino acid is composed of an amino
group (
), a carboxyl group (COO-), and a side chain (blue). The side chain may be nonpolar, polar, or charged, as
well as large or small. It is the variety of amino acid side chains that gives rise to the incredible variation of protein
structure and function.
The Central Dogma: DNA Encodes RNA; RNA Encodes Protein
The flow of genetic information in cells from DNA to mRNA to protein is described by the central
dogma (Figure 15.3), which states that genes specify the sequence of mRNAs, which in turn
specify the sequence of amino acids making up all proteins. The decoding of one molecule to
another is performed by specific proteins and RNAs. Because the information stored in DNA is so
central to cellular function, it makes intuitive sense that the cell would make mRNA copies of this
information for protein synthesis, while keeping the DNA itself intact and protected. The copying
of DNA to RNA is relatively straightforward, with one nucleotide being added to the mRNA strand
for every nucleotide read in the DNA strand. The translation to protein is a bit more complex
because three mRNA nucleotides correspond to one amino acid in the polypeptide sequence.
However, the translation to protein is still systematic and colinear, such that nucleotides 1 to 3
correspond to amino acid 1, nucleotides 4 to 6 correspond to amino acid 2, and so on.
392
15 • Genes and Proteins
Access for free at openstax.org


FIGURE 15.3 Instructions on DNA are transcribed onto messenger RNA. Ribosomes are able to read the genetic information inscribed on a
strand of messenger RNA and use this information to string amino acids together into a protein.
The Genetic Code Is Degenerate and Universal
Each amino acid is defined by a three-nucleotide sequence called the triplet codon. Given the different numbers of
“letters” in the mRNA and protein “alphabets,” scientists theorized that single amino acids must be represented by
combinations of nucleotides. Nucleotide doublets would not be sufficient to specify every amino acid because there
are only 16 possible two-nucleotide combinations (42). In contrast, there are 64 possible nucleotide triplets (43),
which is far more than the number of amino acids. Scientists theorized that amino acids were encoded by nucleotide
15.1 • The Genetic Code
393


triplets and that the genetic code was “degenerate.” In other words, a given amino acid could be encoded by more
than one nucleotide triplet. This was later confirmed experimentally: Francis Crick and Sydney Brenner used the
chemical mutagen proflavin to insert one, two, or three nucleotides into the gene of a virus. When one or two
nucleotides were inserted, the normal proteins were not produced. When three nucleotides were inserted, the
protein was synthesized and functional. This demonstrated that the amino acids must be specified by groups of
three nucleotides. These nucleotide triplets are called codons. The insertion of one or two nucleotides completely
changed the triplet reading frame, thereby altering the message for every subsequent amino acid (Figure 15.5).
Though insertion of three nucleotides caused an extra amino acid to be inserted during translation, the integrity of
the rest of the protein was maintained.
Scientists painstakingly solved the genetic code by translating synthetic mRNAs in vitro and sequencing the proteins
they specified (Figure 15.4).
FIGURE 15.4 This figure shows the genetic code for translating each nucleotide triplet in mRNA into an amino acid or a termination signal in
a protein. (credit: modification of work by NIH)
In addition to codons that instruct the addition of a specific amino acid to a polypeptide chain, three of the 64
codons terminate protein synthesis and release the polypeptide from the translation machinery. These triplets are
called nonsense codons, or stop codons. Another codon, AUG, also has a special function. In addition to specifying
the amino acid methionine, it also serves as the start codon to initiate translation. The reading frame for translation
is set by the AUG start codon near the 5' end of the mRNA. Following the start codon, the mRNA is read in groups of
three until a stop codon is encountered.
The arrangement of the coding table reveals the structure of the code. There are sixteen "blocks" of codons, each
specified by the first and second nucleotides of the codons within the block, e.g., the "AC*" block that corresponds
to the amino acid threonine (Thr). Some blocks are divided into a pyrimidine half, in which the codon ends with U or
C, and a purine half, in which the codon ends with A or G. Some amino acids get a whole block of four codons, like
alanine (Ala), threonine (Thr) and proline (Pro). Some get the pyrimidine half of their block, like histidine (His) and
asparagine (Asn). Others get the purine half of their block, like glutamate (Glu) and lysine (Lys). Note that some
amino acids get a block and a half-block for a total of six codons.
The specification of a single amino acid by multiple similar codons is called "degeneracy." Degeneracy is believed to
be a cellular mechanism to reduce the negative impact of random mutations. Codons that specify the same amino
acid typically only differ by one nucleotide. In addition, amino acids with chemically similar side chains are encoded
by similar codons. For example, aspartate (Asp) and glutamate (Glu), which occupy the GA* block, are both
negatively charged. This nuance of the genetic code ensures that a single-nucleotide substitution mutation might
394
15 • Genes and Proteins
Access for free at openstax.org


specify the same amino acid but have no effect or specify a similar amino acid, preventing the protein from being
rendered completely nonfunctional.
The genetic code is nearly universal. With a few minor exceptions, virtually all species use the same genetic code for
protein synthesis. Conservation of codons means that a purified mRNA encoding the globin protein in horses could
be transferred to a tulip cell, and the tulip would synthesize horse globin. That there is only one genetic code is
powerful evidence that all of life on Earth shares a common origin, especially considering that there are about 1084
possible combinations of 20 amino acids and 64 triplet codons.
LINK TO LEARNING
Transcribe a gene and translate it to protein using complementary pairing and the genetic code at this site
(https://openstax.org/l/create_protein).
FIGURE 15.5 The deletion of two nucleotides shifts the reading frame of an mRNA and changes the entire protein message, creating a
nonfunctional protein or terminating protein synthesis altogether.
SCIENTIFIC METHOD CONNECTION
Which Has More DNA: A Kiwi or a Strawberry?
FIGURE 15.6 Do you think that a kiwi or a strawberry has more DNA per fruit? (credit “kiwi”: "Kelbv"/Flickr; credit: “strawberry”: Alisdair
McDiarmid)
Question: Would a kiwi and strawberry that are approximately the same size (Figure 15.6) also have approximately
the same amount of DNA?
Background: Genes are carried on chromosomes and are made of DNA. All mammals are diploid, meaning they
have two copies of each chromosome. However, not all plants are diploid. The common strawberry is octoploid (8n)
and the cultivated kiwi is hexaploid (6n). Research the total number of chromosomes in the cells of each of these
fruits and think about how this might correspond to the amount of DNA in these fruits’ cell nuclei. What other factors
might contribute to the total amount of DNA in a single fruit? Read about the technique of DNA isolation to
understand how each step in the isolation protocol helps liberate and precipitate DNA.
Hypothesis: Hypothesize whether you would be able to detect a difference in DNA quantity from similarly sized
strawberries and kiwis. Which fruit do you think would yield more DNA?
Test your hypothesis: Isolate the DNA from a strawberry and a kiwi that are similarly sized. Perform the experiment
15.1 • The Genetic Code
395