FIGURE 15.9 Multiple polymerases can transcribe a single bacterial gene while numerous ribosomes concurrently translate the mRNA
transcripts into polypeptides. In this way, a specific protein can rapidly reach a high concentration in the bacterial cell.
LINK TO LEARNING
Visit this BioStudio animation (https://openstax.org/l/transcription2) to see the process of prokaryotic transcription.
15.3 Eukaryotic Transcription
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
•
List the steps in eukaryotic transcription
•
Discuss the role of RNA polymerases in transcription
•
Compare and contrast the three RNA polymerases
•
Explain the significance of transcription factors
Prokaryotes and eukaryotes perform fundamentally the same process of transcription, with a few key differences.
The most important difference between prokaryote and eukaryote transcription is due to the latter’s membrane-
bound nucleus and organelles. With the genes bound in a nucleus, the eukaryotic cell must be able to transport its
mRNA to the cytoplasm and must protect its mRNA from degrading before it is translated. Eukaryotes also employ
three different polymerases that each transcribe a different subset of genes. Eukaryotic mRNAs are usually
monogenic, meaning that they specify a single protein.
Initiation of Transcription in Eukaryotes
Unlike the prokaryotic polymerase that can bind to a DNA template on its own, eukaryotes require several other
proteins, called transcription factors, to first bind to the promoter region and then to help recruit the appropriate
polymerase.
The Three Eukaryotic RNA Polymerases
The features of eukaryotic mRNA synthesis are markedly more complex than those of prokaryotes. Instead of a
single polymerase comprising five subunits, the eukaryotes have three polymerases that are each made up of 10
subunits or more. Each eukaryotic polymerase also requires a distinct set of transcription factors to bring it to the
DNA template.
RNA polymerase I is located in the nucleolus, a specialized nuclear substructure in which ribosomal RNA (rRNA) is
transcribed, processed, and assembled into ribosomes (Table 15.1). The rRNA molecules are considered structural
RNAs because they have a cellular role but are not translated into protein. The rRNAs are components of the
ribosome and are essential to the process of translation. RNA polymerase I synthesizes all of the rRNAs from the
tandemly duplicated set of 18S, 5.8S, and 28S ribosomal genes. (Note that the “S” designation applies to
“Svedberg” units, a nonadditive value that characterizes the speed at which a particle sediments during
centrifugation.)
15.3 • Eukaryotic Transcription
399


Locations, Products, and Sensitivities of the Three Eukaryotic RNA Polymerases
RNA
Polymerase
Cellular
Compartment
Product of Transcription
α-Amanitin
Sensitivity
I
Nucleolus
All rRNAs except 5S rRNA
Insensitive
II
Nucleus
All protein-coding nuclear pre-mRNAs
Extremely sensitive
III
Nucleus
5S rRNA, tRNAs, and small nuclear
RNAs
Moderately sensitive
TABLE 15.1
RNA polymerase II is located in the nucleus and synthesizes all protein-coding nuclear pre-mRNAs. Eukaryotic pre-
mRNAs undergo extensive processing after transcription but before translation. For clarity, this module’s discussion
of transcription and translation in eukaryotes will use the term “mRNAs” to describe only the mature, processed
molecules that are ready to be translated. RNA polymerase II is responsible for transcribing the overwhelming
majority of eukaryotic genes.
RNA polymerase III is also located in the nucleus. This polymerase transcribes a variety of structural RNAs that
includes the 5S pre-rRNA, transfer pre-RNAs (pre-tRNAs), and small nuclear pre-RNAs. The tRNAs have a critical
role in translation; they serve as the “adaptor molecules” between the mRNA template and the growing polypeptide
chain. Small nuclear RNAs have a variety of functions, including “splicing” pre-mRNAs and regulating transcription
factors.
A scientist characterizing a new gene can determine which polymerase transcribes it by testing whether the gene is
expressed in the presence of α-amanitin, an oligopeptide toxin produced by the fly agaric toadstool mushroom and
other species of Amanita. Interestingly, the α-amanitin affects the three polymerases very differently (Table 15.1).
RNA polymerase I is completely insensitive to α-amanitin, meaning that the polymerase can transcribe DNA in vitro
in the presence of this poison. RNA polymerase III is moderately sensitive to the toxin. In contrast, RNA polymerase
II is extremely sensitive to α-amanitin. The toxin prevents the enzyme from progressing down the DNA, and thus
inhibits transcription. Knowing the transcribing polymerase can provide clues as to the general function of the gene
being studied. Because RNA polymerase II transcribes the vast majority of genes, we will focus on this polymerase
in our subsequent discussions about eukaryotic transcription factors and promoters.
RNA Polymerase II Promoters and Transcription Factors
Eukaryotic promoters are much larger and more intricate than prokaryotic promoters. However, both have a
sequence similar to the -10 sequence of prokaryotes. In eukaryotes, this sequence is called the TATA box, and has
the consensus sequence TATAAA on the coding strand. It is located at -25 to -35 bases relative to the initiation (+1)
site (Figure 15.10). This sequence is not identical to the E. coli -10 box, but it conserves the A–T rich element. The
thermostability of A–T bonds is low and this helps the DNA template to locally unwind in preparation for
transcription.
Instead of the simple σ factor that helps bind the prokaryotic RNA polymerase to its promoter, eukaryotes assemble
a complex of transcription factors required to recruit RNA polymerase II to a protein coding gene. Transcription
factors that bind to the promoter are called basal transcription factors. These basal factors are all called TFII (for
Transcription Factor/polymerase II) plus an additional letter (A-J). The core complex is TFIID, which includes a
TATA-binding protein (TBP). The other transcription factors systematically fall into place on the DNA template, with
each one further stabilizing the pre-initiation complex and contributing to the recruitment of RNA polymerase II.
400
15 • Genes and Proteins
Access for free at openstax.org


VISUAL CONNECTION
FIGURE 15.10 A generalized promoter of a gene transcribed by RNA polymerase II is shown. Transcription factors recognize the promoter.
RNA polymerase II then binds and forms the transcription initiation complex.
A scientist splices a eukaryotic promoter in front of a bacterial gene and inserts the gene in a bacterial chromosome.
Would you expect the bacteria to transcribe the gene?
Some eukaryotic promoters also have a conserved CAAT box (GGCCAATCT) at approximately -80. Further upstream
of the TATA box, eukaryotic promoters may also contain one or more GC-rich boxes (GGCG) or octamer boxes
(ATTTGCAT). These elements bind cellular factors that increase the efficiency of transcription initiation and are
often identified in more “active” genes that are constantly being expressed by the cell.
Basal transcription factors are crucial in the formation of a preinitiation complex on the DNA template that
subsequently recruits RNA polymerase II for transcription initiation. The complexity of eukaryotic transcription does
not end with the polymerases and promoters. An army of other transcription factors, which bind to upstream
enhancers and silencers, also help to regulate the frequency with which pre-mRNA is synthesized from a gene.
Enhancers and silencers affect the efficiency of transcription but are not necessary for transcription to proceed.
Promoter Structures for RNA Polymerases I and III
The processes of bringing RNA polymerases I and III to the DNA template involve slightly less complex collections
of transcription factors, but the general theme is the same.
The conserved promoter elements for genes transcribed by polymerases I and III differ from those transcribed by
RNA polymerase II. RNA polymerase I transcribes genes that have two GC-rich promoter sequences in the -45 to
+20 region. These sequences alone are sufficient for transcription initiation to occur, but promoters with additional
sequences in the region from -180 to -105 upstream of the initiation site will further enhance initiation. Genes that
are transcribed by RNA polymerase III have upstream promoters or promoters that occur within the genes
themselves.
Eukaryotic transcription is a tightly regulated process that requires a variety of proteins to interact with each other
and with the DNA strand. Although the process of transcription in eukaryotes involves a greater metabolic
investment than in prokaryotes, it ensures that the cell transcribes precisely the pre-mRNAs that it needs for protein
15.3 • Eukaryotic Transcription
401


synthesis.
EVOLUTION CONNECTION
The Evolution of Promoters
The evolution of genes may be a familiar concept. Mutations can occur in genes during DNA replication, and the
result may or may not be beneficial to the cell. By altering an enzyme, structural protein, or some other factor, the
process of mutation can transform functions or physical features. However, eukaryotic promoters and other gene
regulatory sequences may evolve as well. For instance, consider a gene that, over many generations, becomes more
valuable to the cell. Maybe the gene encodes a structural protein that the cell needs to synthesize in abundance for
a certain function. If this is the case, it would be beneficial to the cell for that gene’s promoter to recruit transcription
factors more efficiently and increase gene expression.
Scientists examining the evolution of promoter sequences have reported varying results. In part, this is because it is
difficult to infer exactly where a eukaryotic promoter begins and ends. Some promoters occur within genes; others
are located very far upstream, or even downstream, of the genes they are regulating. However, when researchers
limited their examination to human core promoter sequences that were defined experimentally as sequences that
bind the preinitiation complex, they found that promoters evolve even faster than protein-coding genes.
It is still unclear how promoter evolution might correspond to the evolution of humans or other complex organisms.
However, the evolution of a promoter to effectively make more or less of a given gene product is an intriguing
alternative to the evolution of the genes themselves.1
Eukaryotic Elongation and Termination
Following the formation of the preinitiation complex, the polymerase is released from the other transcription factors,
and elongation is allowed to proceed as it does in prokaryotes with the polymerase synthesizing pre-mRNA in the 5'
to 3' direction. As discussed previously, RNA polymerase II transcribes the major share of eukaryotic genes, so in
this section we will focus on how this polymerase accomplishes elongation and termination.
Although the enzymatic process of elongation is essentially the same in eukaryotes and prokaryotes, the DNA
template is considerably more complex. When eukaryotic cells are not dividing, their genes exist as a diffuse mass
of DNA and proteins called chromatin. The DNA is tightly packaged around charged histone proteins at repeated
intervals. These DNA–histone complexes, collectively called nucleosomes, are regularly spaced and include 146
nucleotides of DNA wound around eight histones like thread around a spool.
For polynucleotide synthesis to occur, the transcription machinery needs to move histones out of the way every time
it encounters a nucleosome. This is accomplished by a special protein complex called FACT, which stands for
“facilitates chromatin transcription.” This complex pulls histones away from the DNA template as the polymerase
moves along it. Once the pre-mRNA is synthesized, the FACT complex replaces the histones to recreate the
nucleosomes.
The termination of transcription is different for the different polymerases. Unlike in prokaryotes, elongation by RNA
polymerase II in eukaryotes takes place 1,000 to 2,000 nucleotides beyond the end of the gene being transcribed.
This pre-mRNA tail is subsequently removed by cleavage during mRNA processing. On the other hand, RNA
polymerases I and III require termination signals. Genes transcribed by RNA polymerase I contain a specific
18-nucleotide sequence that is recognized by a termination protein. The process of termination in RNA polymerase
III involves an mRNA hairpin similar to rho-independent termination of transcription in prokaryotes.
1
H Liang et al., “Fast evolution of core promoters in primate genomes,” Molecular Biology and Evolution 25 (2008): 1239–44.
402
15 • Genes and Proteins
Access for free at openstax.org