

[Page 1]
MT HOOD COMMUNITY COLLEGE BIOL OGY 101 
General Biology I: Survey of Cellular Biology 
LISA BAR TEE AND CHRISTINE ANDERSON 
Open Oregon Educational Resources


[Page 2]
Mt Hood Community College Biology 101 by Lisa Bartee and Christine Anderson is licensed under a Creative Commons 
Attribution 4.0 International License, except where otherwise noted.


[Page 3]
CONTENTS 
Introduction 1 
PART I. 1. REFERENCE INFORMATION 
1. Presenting Data 7 
2. Using credible sources 13 
3. Citing your sources 18 
4. Writing for Science 22 
PART II. THE PROCESS OF SCIENCE 
5. The Nature of Science 31 
6. Scientific Inquiry 33 
7. Hypothesis Testing 35 
8. Types of Data 41 
9. Basic and Applied Science 43 
10. Reporting Scientific Work 45 
PART III. THEMES AND CONCEPTS OF BIOLOGY 
11. Properties of Life 49 
12. Levels of Organization of Living Things 55 
13. The Diversity of Life 59 
14. Phylogenetic Trees 61 
PART IV. CELL STRUCTURE AND FUNCTION 
15. How Cells Are Studied 65 
16. Comparing Prokaryotic and Eukaryotic Cells 70


[Page 4]
17. The Plasma Membrane and The Cytoplasm 73 
18. Ribosomes 76 
19. The Cytoskeleton 78 
20. Flagella and Cilia 80 
21. The Endomembrane System 82 
22. The Nucleus 83 
23. The Endoplasmic Reticulum 85 
24. The Golgi Apparatus 87 
25. Vesicles and Vacuoles, Lysosomes, and Peroxisomes 89 
26. Mitochondria and Chloroplasts 92 
27. The Cell Wall 95 
28. Extracellular matrix and intercellular junctions 96 
29. Animal vs Plant cells 99 
30. The Production of a Protein 100 
31. Chapter Quiz 104 
32. Summary Table of Prokaryotic and Eukaryotic Cells and Functions 105 
PART V. MEMBRANES AND MOVEMENT OF MOLECULES 
33. The Plasma Membrane 109 
34. Transport Across Membranes 113 
35. Passive Transport: Diffusion 115 
36. Passive Transport: Osmosis 118 
37. Active Transport 121 
PART VI. ENZYME-CATALYZED REACTIONS 
38. Metabolic Pathways 127 
39. Energy 129 
40. Enzymes 134


[Page 5]
41. Changes in Enzyme Activity 140 
42. Feedback Inhibition in Metabolic Pathways 145 
PART VII. HOW CELLS OBTAIN ENERGY 
43. Energy in Living Systems 149 
44. From Mouth to Molecule: Digestion 151 
45. Metabolism 153 
46. An overview of Cellular Respiration 155 
47. Aerobic Respiration: Glycolysis 157 
48. Aerobic Respiration: The Citric Acid Cycle 159 
49. Aerobic Respiration: Oxidative Phosphorylation 161 
50. Fermentation: an anaerobic process 164 
51. Metabolism of molecules other than glucose 167 
52. Anaerobic Cellular Respiration 170 
PART VIII. PHOTOSYNTHESIS 
53. Putting Photosynthesis into Context 175 
54. Light and Pigments 180 
55. Light Dependent Reactions 185 
56. The Calvin Cycle 189 
57. Photosynthesis in Prokaryotes 192


[Page 7]
INTR ODUCTION 
BI101 Course Outline 
BI101 Cour se Descripti on: Adaptations of B I101 v ary in theme. B I101A is a surv ey course that 
introduces the discip line of cellular biology , exploring topics including the cellular basis of lif e, cell 
structure and function and the metabolic pr ocesses that aff ect cells. B I101 intr oduces students to 
biology as a scientific discipline and engages students in the process of scientific discovery. All BI101 
courses are equivalent; only one can be used to fulfill degr ee requirements. BI101, BI102 and BI103 
are non-sequential and can be tak en in an y or der. S tudents considering majors in science or pr e-
professional health occupations are advised to eventually take BI211, B1212 and BI213. 
 
BI101A Cour se Descripti on: Adaptations of  BI101 v ary in theme, but all exp lore the scientific 
process and topics in cellular basis of lif e, including cell structur e and function. B I101A is a surv ey 
course that intr oduces the discip line of cellular biology . Topics discussed include: the princip les of 
the scientific method, cellular basis of lif e, cell structur e and function, and the metabolic pr ocesses 
that affect cells. All BI101 courses are equivalent; only one can be used to fulfill degree requirements. 
BI101, B I102, and B I103 ar e non-sequential and can be tak en in an y or der. Pr erequisite: RD090, 
WR090, and MTH020, each with a grade of “C” or better; or p lacement above stated course lev els. 
Students considering majors in science or pr e-professional health occupations ar e advised to 
eventually take BI211, BI212, and BI213. 
 
Course and Student Learning Outcomes 
1. Apply the scientific method to biological questions by designing experiments and using the resulting data 
to form a conclusion.1A. Design a controlled experiment to answer a biological question. 
1B. Predict the outcome of an experiment. 
1C. Collect, manipulate, and analyze quantitative and qualitative data. 
1D. Answer a biological question using data. 
2. Select, e valuate, and utilize  discipline-specific sources of information to research  a biological topic.2A. 
MHCC BI101   1


[Page 8]
Differentiate between questions that can and cannot be answered using science.2B. Identify appropriate 
credible sources of information to research a topic. 
2C. Evaluate sources of information for their strengths and weaknesses. 
3. Assess the strengths and weaknesses of the design of scientific studies and conclusions drawn from such 
studies.3A. Evaluate the strengths and weaknesses of their own as well as published experiments. 
4. Communicate information using appropriate biological terminology in multiple  formats.4A. Use an 
appropriate written format to present scientific information.4B. Use appropriate biological terminology 
to answer written and oral questions. 
5. Use evidence to develop informed opinions on contemporary biological issues while considering cultural 
and ethical implications.5A. Research current ethical issues in topics relating to inheritance, gene 
expression and regulation.5B. Form opinions based on published scientific research. 
6. Discuss and apply  biological theories and concepts of cellular biology .6A. Describe the char acteristics 
that can be used to determine if something is living.6B. Describe the structure and function of cellular 
structures contained in prokaryotic and eukaryotic cells. 
6C. Describe the structure of cell membr anes and explain their function in maintaining the internal en vironment of 
the cell. 
6D. Explain the roll of enzyme-catalyzed reactions in cellular metabolism. 
6E. Compare the energy-generating processes within different types of cells. 
Instructional Methods 
To help the student achiev e the objectiv es outlined abo ve, a v ariety of techniques will be used 
including in-class activities, small gr oup discussions and pr oblem solving, homework assignments, 
in-class problem solving and laboratory experiences. Typically, each topic will be introduced through 
homework assignments utilizing online or print r esources, r einforced and p laced in perspectiv e 
during class, and explored further in laboratory. 
Class communication will v ary with instructor and ma y include lectur es, demonstrations, case-
studies, films, oral and written student -presentations, and use of online tools and other f orms. None 
of these activities will replace classroom contact hours. 
Assessment 
Completion of course objectiv es and assigned ev aluation accor ding to criteria pr ovided b y the 
instructor will be required. Grading will be in accordance with college standards. 
Online Assessment 
Assessment of course outcomes is designed to be v erified as appr opriate using online quizzes and 
tests; these assessments ma y be proctored and may require travel to an appr oved testing center. The 
same outcomes and grading standards will apply for all instructional formats. 
 
2  LISA BAR TEE AND CHRISTINE ANDERSON


[Page 9]
MHCC BI101   3


[Page 11]
PAR T I. 
1. REFERENCE INFORMA TION


[Page 13]
CHAPTER 1. 
PRESENTING DATA 
After you have collected data in an experiment, y ou need to figur e out the best w ay to pr esent that 
data in a meaningful way. Depending on the type of data, and the story that you are trying to tell using 
that data, you may present your data in different ways. 
DESCRIPTIVE TITLES 
All figures that present data should stand alone – this means that y ou should be able to interpr et the 
information contained in the figure without referring to anything else (such as the methods section of 
the paper). This means that all figures should have a descriptive title that gives information about the 
independent and dependent v ariable. Another way to state this is that the title should describe w hat 
you are testing and w hat you are measuring. A good starting point to dev eloping a title is “the eff ect 
of [the independent variable] on the [dependent variable].” 
Here are some examples of good titles for figures: 
• The effect of exercise on heart rate 
• Growth rates of E. coli at different temperatures 
• The relationship between heat shock time and transformation efficiency 
Here are a few less effective titles: 
• Heart rate and exercise 
• Graph of E. coli temperature growth 
• Table for experiment 1 
An interactive or media element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view it online here: 
https://openoregon.pressbooks.pub/mhccbiology101/?p=23 
MHCC BI101   7


[Page 14]
DATA TABLES 
The easiest way to organize data is by putting it into a data table. In most data tables, the independent 
variable (the variable that you are testing or changing on purpose) will be in the column to the left and 
the dependent variable(s) will be across the top of the table. 
Be sure to: 
• Label each row and column so that the table can be interpreted 
• Include the units that are being used 
• Add a descriptive title for the table 
Example 
You are evaluating the effect of different types of fertilizers on plant growth. Y ou plant 12 tomato plants and divide them 
into three groups, where each group contains four plants. T o the first group, y ou do not add fertilizer and the plants are 
watered with plain water . The second and third groups are watered with two different br ands of fertilizer . After three 
weeks, you measure the growth of each plant in centimeters and calculate the average growth for each type of fertilizer. 
The effect of different brands of fertilizer on tomato plant growth over three weeks 
Treatment 
Plant Number 
1 2 3 4 Average 
No treatment 10 12 8 9 9.75 
Brand A 15 16 14 12 14.25 
Brand B 22 25 21 27 23.75 
Scientific Method Review: Can you identify the key parts of the scientific method from this experiment? 
• Independent variable – Type of treatment (brand of fertilizer) 
• Dependent variable – plant growth in cm 
• Control group(s) – Plants treated with no fertilizer 
• Experimental group(s) – Plants treated with different brands of fertilizer 
GRAPHING DATA 
Graphs ar e used to disp lay data because it is easier to see tr ends in the data w hen it is disp layed 
visually compar ed to w hen it is disp layed numericall y in a table. Comp licated data can often be 
displayed and interpreted more easily in a graph format than in a data table. 
In a grap h, the X -axis runs horizontall y (side to side ) and the Y -axis runs v ertically (up and do wn). 
Typically, the independent v ariable will be sho wn on the X axis and the dependent v ariable will be 
shown on the Y axis (just like you learned in math class!). 
8  LISA BAR TEE AND CHRISTINE ANDERSON


[Page 15]
LINE GRAPH 
Line graphs are the best type of grap h to use w hen you are displaying a change in something o ver a 
continuous range. For example, you could use a line grap h to disp lay a change in temperatur e over 
time. Time is a continuous v ariable because it can have any value between two given measurements. 
It is measured along a continuum. Between 1 minute and 2 minutes are an infinite number of values, 
such as 1.1 minute or 1.93456 minutes. 
Changes in  several different samp les can be sho wn on the same grap h by using lines  that differ in 
color, symbol, etc. 
Figure 1: Change in bubble height in centimeters over 120 seconds for three 
samples containing different amounts of enzyme. Sample A contained no enzyme, 
sample B contained 1mL of enzyme, sample C contained 2 mL of enzyme. 
Figure 1: Change in bubble height in centimeters over 120 
seconds for three samples containing different amounts of 
enzyme. Sample A contained no enzyme, sample B contained 
1mL of enzyme, sample C contained 2 mL of enzyme. 
BAR  GRAPH 
Bar graphs are used to compare measurements between different groups. Bar graphs should be used 
MHCC BI101   9


[Page 16]
when your data is not continuous, but rather is divided into diff erent categories. If y ou counted the 
number of birds of different species, each species of bird would be its own category. There is no value 
between “robin” and “eagle”, so this data is not continuous. 
Figure 2: Final bubble height after 120 seconds for three samples containing different 
amounts of enzyme. Sample A contained no enzyme, sample B contained 1 mL of enzyme, 
sample C contained 2 mL of enzyme. 
SCA TTER PL OT 
Scatter Plots are used to evaluate the relationship between two different continuous variables. These 
graphs compar e changes in tw o diff erent v ariables at once. F or examp le, y ou could look at the 
relationship between height and weight. Both height and weight are continuous variables. You could 
not use a scatter plot to look at the relationship between number of children in a family and weight of 
each child because the number of children in a family is not a continuous variable: you can’t have 2.3 
children in a family. 
10  LISA BAR TEE AND CHRISTINE ANDERSON


[Page 17]
Figure 3: The relationship between height (in meters) and weight (in kilograms) 
of members of the girls softball team. “OLS example weight vs height 
scatterplot” by Stpasha is in the Public Domain 
AN INTERA CTIVE OR MEDIA ELEMENT HAS BEEN EX CLUDED FR OM THIS VERSION OF THE 
TEXT . YOU CAN VIEW IT ONLINE HERE: 
HTTPS:/ /OPENOREGON.PRESSBOOKS.PUB/ MHCCBIOL OGY101/ ?P=23 
HOW TO MAKE A GRAPH 
1. Identify your independent and dependent variables. 
2. Choose the correct type of graph by determining whether each variable is continuous or not. 
3. Determine the values that are going to go on the X and Y axis. If the values are continuous, they 
need to be evenly spaced based on the value. 
4. Label the X and Y axis, including units. 
5. Graph your data. 
6. Add a descriptive caption to your graph. Note that data tables are titled above the figure and 
graphs are captioned below the figure. 
Example 
Let’s go back to the data from our fertilizer e xperiment and use it to mak e a graph. I’ve decided to graph only the average 
growth for the four plants because that is the most important piece of data. Including e very single data point would make 
the graph very confusing. 
1. The independent variable is type of treatment and the dependent variable is plant growth (in cm). 
2. Type of treatment is not a continuous variable. There is no midpoint value between fertilizer br ands 
(Brand A 1/2 doesn ’t make sense). Plant growth is a continuous variable. It mak es sense to sub-divide 
centimeters into smaller values. Since the independent variable is categorical and the dependent variable 
is continuous, this graph should be a bar graph. 
MHCC BI101   11


[Page 18]
3. Plant growth (the dependent variable ) should go on the Y axis and type of treatment (the independent 
variable) should go on the X axis. 
4. Notice that the values on the Y axis are continuous and evenly spaced. Each line represents an increase of 
5cm. 
5. Notice that both the X and the Y axis have labels that include units (when required). 
6. Notice that the gr aph has a descriptiv e caption that allows the figure to stand alone without additional 
information given from the procedure: you know that this graph shows the average of the measurements 
taken from four tomato plants. 
Figure 4: Average growth (in cm) of tomato plants when treated with different brands of 
fertilizer. There were four tomato plants in each group (n = 4). 
12  LISA BAR TEE AND CHRISTINE ANDERSON


[Page 19]
CHAPTER 2. 
USING CREDIBLE SOUR CES 
Learning Objectives 
Course Objectiv e for this section:  Select, e valuate, and utilize discipline-specific information and liter ature to e xplore 
topics. 
• Differentiate between questions that can and cannot be answered using science. 
• Identify appropriate credible sources of information to research a topic. 
• Evaluate sources of information for their strengths and weaknesses. 
Science is a very specific way of learning, or knowing, about the world. Humans have used the process 
of science to learn a huge amount about the w ay the natural w orld works. Science is r esponsible for 
amazing innovations in medicine, h ygiene, and technology . There are however, areas of kno wledge 
and human experience that the methods of science cannot be app lied to. These include such things 
as answ ering pur ely moral questions, aesthetic questions, or w hat can be generall y categorized as 
spiritual questions. Science has cannot in vestigate these ar eas because they ar e outside the r ealm of 
material phenomena, the phenomena of matter and energy, and cannot be observed and measured. 
Questions that can be 
answered using science 
Questions that cannot be 
answered using science 
·       What is the optimum temperature for the growth of E. coli bacteria? 
·       Do birds prefer bird feeders of a specific color? 
·       What is the cause of this disease? 
·       How effective is this drug in treating this disease? 
·       How tall is Santa Claus? 
·       Do angels exist? 
·       Which is better: classical music or rock and roll? 
·       What are the ethical implications of human cloning? 
Since this is a biology class, w e will be f ocusing on questions that can be answ ered scientificall y. 
Remember that in the scientific pr ocess, observations lead to questions. A scientific question is one 
that can be answered by using the process of science (testing hypotheses, making observations about 
the natural world, designing experiments). 
Sometimes you will directly make observations yourself about the natural world that lead you to ask 
scientific questions, other times y ou might hear or r ead something that leads y ou to ask a question. 
MHCC BI101   13


[Page 20]
Regardless of how you make your initial observation, you will want to do r esearch about your topic 
before you start setting up an experiment. W hen you’re learning about a topic, it’ s important to use 
credible sources of information. 
TYPES OF SOUR CES 
Whether conducting r esearch in the social sciences, humanities ( especially history), arts, or natural 
sciences, the ability to distinguish betw een primary and secondary sour ce material  is essential. 
Basically, this distinction illustrates the degr ee to w hich the author of a piece is r emoved from the 
actual event being described. This means whether the author is reporting information first hand (or is 
first to r ecord these immediatel y following an ev ent), or conveying the experiences and opinions of 
others—that is, second hand. In biology, the distinction would be between the person (or people) who 
conducted the research and someone who didn’t actually do the research, but is merely reporting on 
it. 
PRIMARY SOUR CES 
These are contemporary accounts of an event, written by someone who experienced or witnessed the 
event in question. In general, these original documents (i.e., they ar e not about another document or 
account) are often diaries, letters, memoirs, journals, speeches, manuscripts, interviews, photographs, 
audio or video recordings, or original literary or theatrical works. 
In science, a “primary sour ce” or the “primary literatur e” r efers to the original publication of a 
scientist’s new data, results, and conclusions. These articles are written for other experts in a specific 
scientific field. 
You’ve probably done a writing assignment or other pr oject during w hich you have participated in 
a peer review process. During this pr ocess, your project was critiqued and ev aluated by people of 
similar competence to yourself (your peers). This gave you feedback on which to improve your work. 
Scientific articles typically go through a peer review process before they are published in an academic 
journal. In this case, the peers w ho ar e r eviewing the article ar e other experts in the specific field 
about which the paper is written. This allo ws other scientists to critique experimental design, data, 
and conclusions before that information is published in an academic journal. Often, the scientists who 
did the experiment and w ho are trying to publish it ar e required to do additional w ork or edit their 
paper before it is published. The goal of the scientific peer r eview process is to ensure that published 
primary articles contain the best possible science. 
SECOND ARY SOUR CES 
The function of a secondary sour ce is to interpr et the primary source. A secondary sour ce can be 
An interactive or media element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view it online here: 
https://openoregon.pressbooks.pub/mhccbiology101/?p=24 
14  LISA BAR TEE AND CHRISTINE ANDERSON


[Page 21]
described as at least one step r emoved fr om the ev ent or p henomenon under r eview. Secondary 
source materials interpr et, assign v alue to, conjectur e upon, and dra w conclusions about the ev ents 
reported in primary sour ces. These ar e usuall y in the f orm of published w orks such as magazine 
articles or books, but may include radio or television documentaries, or conference proceedings. 
POPULAR VS. SCHOLARL Y SOUR CES 
POPULAR SCHOLARLY 
Broad range of topics, presented in shorter articles Specific, narrowly focused topics in lengthy, in-depth articles 
Articles offer overview of subject matter; interpretation, rather than 
original research; sometimes contain feature articles and reports on 
current social issues and public opinion 
Articles often contain previously unpublished research and detail new 
developments in field 
Intended to attract a general readership without any particular expertise 
or advanced education 
Intended for specialist readership of researchers, academics, 
students and professionals 
Written by staff (not always attributed) or freelance writers 
using general, popular language 
Written by identified specialists and researchers in subject area, 
usually employing technical, subject-specific language and jargon 
Edited and approved for publication in-house (not peer-reviewed) Critically evaluated by peers (fellow scholars)   in field for content, 
scholarly soundness, and academic value 
Articles rarely contain references or footnotes and follow no specific 
format 
Well-researched, documented articles nearly always follow standard 
format: 
abstract, introduction, literature review, methodology, results, 
conclusion, bibliography/references 
Designed to attract eye of potential newsstand customers: usually filled 
with photographs or illustrations, printed on glossier paper 
Sober design: mostly text with some tables or graphs accompanying 
articles; usually little or no photography; negligible, if any, 
advertising; rarely printed on high-gloss paper 
Each issue begins with page number ‘1’ 
Page numbers of issues within a volume (year) are usually consecutive 
(i.e., first page of succeeding issue is number following last page 
number of previous issue) 
Presented to entertain, promote point of view, and/or sell products Intended to present researchers’ opinions and findings based on 
original research 
Examples: Newsweek, Rolling Stone, Vogue Examples: Science, Nature, Journal of Microbial and Biochemical 
Technology 
 In science, it is often extr emely difficult to r ead and understand primary articles unless y ou are an 
expert in that specific scientific field. Secondary sour ces are typically easier to read and can give you 
the important inf ormation from a primary sour ce, but onl y if the secondary sour ce has interpr eted 
the information correctly! It is always better to go to the primary source if possible because otherwise 
you are relying on someone else’ s interpretation of the inf ormation. However, it is al ways better to 
use a source that you can read and understand rather than a sour ce that you can’t. For this reason, it 
is very important to be able to identify credible secondary sources. 
An interactive or media element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view it online here: 
https://openoregon.pressbooks.pub/mhccbiology101/?p=24 
MHCC BI101   15


[Page 22]
EVALU ATING CREDIBILITY 
When you write a scientific paper ( or any paper, really), you want to back up y our statements with 
credible sources. You will need to identify cr edible sources to help y ou research scientific topics to 
help you develop interesting scientific questions. You will also need sources to help you form a well-
educated hypothesis that is not just based on y our guess about what will happen. A credible source is 
one that is trustworthy from which the information can be believed. Credible sources are written by 
people who are experts in the field (or at least are very knowledgeable) about the subject that they are 
commenting on. 
We will be using a v ariation of the CRAAP test to help y ou determine w hether or not sour ces that 
you find ar e credible or not. The CRAAP T est was created by Sarah B lakeslee, of the U niversity of 
California at Chico’s Meriam Library. It is adapted below. When evaluating the credibility of sources 
using this method, if it’s CRAAP, it’s good! 
You can use the table below to help you evaluate the credibility of your sources. 
Credibility Table 
Factors to 
consider 
Least reliable 
(0 points) 
Possibly reliable 
(1 point) 
Most reliable 
(2 points) 
Currency No date of publication or 
revision given Outdated for this particular topic Recently published or revised 
Reliable 
source 
Unreliable website, no additional 
info available Possibly reliable Official government or organization, 
institutional sites, academic journals 
Author 
No author is given / the author is 
not qualified to write about this 
topic 
Author is educated on topic or is staff of an organization 
assumed to be knowledgeable on this specific topic 
Specifically identified expert in this 
field with degrees / credentials in this 
subject 
Accuracy 
No review process and 
information is not supported by 
evidence from cited sources 
The information may have been reviewed or edited by 
someone knowledgeable in the field. It mentions but does 
not directly cite other sources 
The information has been peer 
reviewed and is supported by evidence 
from cited credible sources 
Purpose Obviously biased or trying to sell 
you something Sponsored source; may present unbalanced information Balanced, neutral, presents all sides of 
the issue fully 
In general, do not use a sour ce if it doesn ’t pass the CRAAP test! F or our purposes, do not use an y 
sources that score less than 6 points using the credibility table. 
Several examples are given below for sources that you might come across if you were researching the 
topic of vaccine safety. 
Example 1: 
CDC (Centers for Disease Contr ol and Pr evention). Aug 28, 2015. V accine Safety [Internet]. [cited 
May 12, 2016]. Available from: http://www.cdc.gov/vaccinesafety/index.html 
 Score Discussion – why did you give that score? 
Currency 2 Aug 28 2015 is recent and shows that this information is updated frequently. 
Reliable 
source 2 I looked at the “about this organization” and learned that the CDC is a major government organization that works to protect 
Americans from health, safety, and security threats. They are a division of the US department of health and human services. 
Author 1 A specific author was not identified, but the page states that the content is from the CDC, which suggests that it was written 
by a knowledgeable staff member. 
16  LISA BAR TEE AND CHRISTINE ANDERSON


[Page 23]
Accuracy 1.5 No information is given about the review process, but it was probably edited by staff at the CDC. There is a list of citations 
and links to primary scientific articles supporting the information. 
Purpose 2 
The point of view does not appear to be biased because it seems to be presenting factual information. Admittedly, it only 
presents the pro-vaccine side of the argument. There are no ads on the page or other information trying to change the 
reader’s viewpoint. 
Credibility 
Score 
8.5/
10 
This seems like an excellent source to use for research. It’s readable and I could look at the primary articles if I wanted to 
check them out. 
Example 2: 
Stop Mandatory Vaccination. N.d.. The Dangers of V accines and Vaccinations [Internet]. [cited May 
12, 2016]. Available from: http://www.stopmandatoryvaccination.com/vaccine-dangers/ 
 
 Score Discussion – why did you give that score? 
Currency 1 The copyright is given as 2015, but there is no date for this specific article. It does reference something that took place in 
2015, so it is likely written after that. 
Reliable 
source 0 The “About” page states that the organization was started by Larry Cook using a GoFundMe platform 
Author 0 
Larry Cook has been devoted to the natural lifestyle for 25 years, but doesn’t appear to have any degrees or specific expertise 
on this topic. Other contributing authors include Landee Martin, who has a Bachelor’s of Science in Psychology (which isn’t 
related to vaccine safety), and Brittney Kara, who is a mother who has studied holistic living for the last 17 years. None of the 
individuals specifically identified on the website appear to be experts in the field. 
Accuracy 0.5 It seems unlikely that there is any review process. There are links to several sources, but none of them appear to be primary 
scientific articles. Several are links to interviews. 
Purpose 0 This source is extremely biased. Even the name of the website is biased. There is a link to donate to the webpage. There are at 
least 10 ads for anti-vaccine books and websites. 
Credibility 
Score 
1.5/
10 
I would not want to use this source to research this topic. It’s extremely biased and doesn’t seem to offer much evidence for 
its assertions. 
SOUR CES 
“Distinguish Betw een Primary and Secondary Sour ces” by University of Calif ornia, Santa Cruz, 
University Library is licensed under CC BY 3.0 
“Distinguish betw een P opular and Scholarl y J ournals” by University of Calif ornia, Santa Cruz, 
University Library is licensed under CC BY 3.0 
MHCC BI101   17


[Page 24]
CHAPTER 3. 
CITING YOUR SOUR CES 
 One of the goals f or any class is to help students become better scholars. And, one of the important 
skills of scholarship is pr oper citation of resources used. Citations demonstrate your “credentials” as 
a scholar, and provide a resource to your readers of good reference material. 
WHY DO YOU HAVE TO CITE YOUR SOUR CES? 
No research paper is comp lete without a list of the sour ces that y ou used in y our writing.  Scholars 
are very careful to keep accurate records of the resources they’ve used, and of the ideas and concepts 
they’ve quoted or used fr om others. This r ecord k eeping is generall y pr esented in the f orm of 
citations. 
A citation is a description of a book, article, URL, etc. that provides enough information so that others 
can locate the sour ce you used themselves. It allows you to credit the authors of the sour ces you use 
and clarify which ideas belong to you and which belong to other sources. And providing a citation or 
reference will allow others to find and use these sour ces as well.  Most research papers have a list of 
citations or cited references and there are special formatting guidelines for different types of research. 
However, there are many “proper” formats because each discip line has its o wn rules. In general w e 
ask only that you use one of the “official” formats and that you use it consistently. To understand what 
we mean b y “consistent”, compare the citations in tw o scientific journals. Y ou will notice that each 
journal has its own rules for whether an article title is in quotes, bold, underlined, etc., but within each 
journal the rule app lies to all r eference citations. Belo w is a condensed guide to the general f ormat 
used in science ( CSE). For more detailed inf ormation consult one of the online citation guides and 
generators. 
PLA GIARISM 
Plagiarism is pr esenting the w ords or ideas of someone else as y our o wn without pr oper 
acknowledgment of the sour ce. W hen y ou w ork on a r esearch paper y ou will pr obably find 
supporting material for your paper from works by others. It’s okay to quote people and use their ideas, 
but you do need to correctly credit them. Even when you summarize or paraphrase information found 
in books, articles, or W eb pages, y ou must ackno wledge the original author . To a void p lagiarism, 
include a reference to any material you use that pr ovides a fact not commonl y known, or whenever 
you use inf ormation fr om another author .  In short, if y ou didn ’t collect the data or r each the 
conclusion on your own, cite it! 
18  LISA BAR TEE AND CHRISTINE ANDERSON


[Page 25]
These are all examples of plagiarism: 
• Buying or using a term paper written by someone else. 
• Cutting and pasting passages from the Web, a book, or an article and insert them into your paper 
without citing them. Warning! It is now easy for your instructors to search and identify passages 
that you have copied from the Web. 
• Using the words or ideas of another person without citing them. 
• Paraphrasing that person’s words without citing them. 
 
Tips for Avoiding Plagiarism: 
• First, use your own ideas—it should be your paper and your ideas should be the focus. 
• Use the ideas of others sparingly—only to support or reinforce your own argument. 
• When taking notes, include complete citation information for each item you use. 
• Use quotation marks when directly stating another person’s words. Quotes are not frequently used 
in scientific writing unless you are directly quoting someone’s spoken words. 
CITING SOUR CES IN CSE FORMA T 
The Council of Science Editors ( CSE) citation f ormat is commonl y used in scientific writing. CSE 
format emp hasizes the inf ormation that is important w hen writing scientificall y: w ho wr ote the 
information and w hen they wr ote it. In diff erent fields, ther e is an emp hasis on diff erent types of 
information. In the humanities, MLA f ormat is commonl y used. This sty le emphasizes the author’ s 
name and the page number. This information allows a reader to track down the exact quotes that are 
being discussed. Another commonly used format, APA, emphasizes the author’s name and the year the 
information was published. 
The standard format for citing a sour ce in science writing is the N ame-year format. In this f ormat, 
the first author’s last name is f ollowed by the date. For example:  Not all populations o f alligators in the 
everglades are at risk from habitat loss (Nicholson, 2002). 
If you are not familiar with the CSE citation sty le, you can get additional inf ormation and examples 
at http://writing.wisc.edu/Handbook/DocCSE_NameYear.html 
Beware of computerized “ citation creators.”  While they can get y ou part way to a corr ect citation, 
they rarely are 100% correct.  For example, they often fail to put the last name first. 
 
MHCC BI101   19


[Page 26]
Citing a scientific journal article 
Author’s last name first initial, ne xt author’s last name first initial. Date published. Title of Article. Journal Name. V olume 
(issue): pages. 
Please note that you need to cite the JOURNAL, not the DATABASE that you got it from. Citing the database in which you 
found a scientific journal article is like citing Google for an internet resource that you are using. 
Flores-Cruz Z, Allen C. 2011. Necessity of OxyR for the h ydrogen peroxide stress response and full virulence in Ralstonia 
solanacearum. Appl Environ Microbiol. 77(18):6426-6432. 
Werling BP, Lowenstein DM, Straub CS, Gratton C. 2012. Multi-predator effects produced by functionally distinct species 
vary with prey density. J Insect Sci; 12(30): 346-378. 
Shriner, W.M. 1998. Yellow-bellied marmot and golden-mantled ground squirrel responses to heterospecific alarm calls. 
Animal Behaviour 55:529-536. 
Citing an internet resource 
Author’s last name, first initial. Date published. Title of W ebsite [Internet]. Publisher information. [ cited on date that y ou 
accessed the information]. Available from: URL where you accessed the source. 
Williamson RC. 2004. Deciduous tree galls [Internet]. Madison (WI): Univ ersity of Wisconsin-Madison; [ cited 2013 Sep 
12]. Available from http://labs.russell.wisc.edu/pddc/files/Fact_Sheets/FC_PDF/Deciduous_Tree_Galls.pdf 
[BP] The Biology Project. 2003. The chemistry of amino acids [Internet]. Univ ersity of Arizona; [ cited 2004 Mar 17]. 
Available from: http://www.biology.arizona.edu/biochemistry/problem_sets/aa/aa.html 
Hilton-Taylor C, compiler. 2000. 2000 IUCN red list of threatened species [Internet]. Gland (Switzerland) and Cambridge 
(UK): IUCN; [cited 2002 Feb 12]. Available from: http://www.redlist.org/. 
CITING SOUR CES WITHIN TEXT 
We will be using the CSE N ame-year f ormat f or citations. W hen y ou w ant to pr ovide a citation 
reference for a statement that y ou are making, y ou should end the sentence with (F irst author’s last 
name, year). If the article w as written b y an organization and not a specific author , you can use the 
name of the organization (or an abbreviation for the name). 
Example: Sickle cell anemia is caused by abnormally-shaped haemoglobin proteins (NIH, 2012). 
In the References Cited section (a.k.a. Literature cited…) list all the sour ces you cited in y our paper, 
but do not include any items that you did not specifically cite within the body of your paper or project, 
even if you read them!  Except in rare instances, do not cite a r eference that you have not personally 
read. 
You should then list all y our references in the Literatur e Cited section alphabetically by author’s last 
name. 
20  LISA BAR TEE AND CHRISTINE ANDERSON


[Page 27]
For mor e inf ormation and lots of examp les of w hat to do in specific instances, p lease 
visit http://writing.wisc.edu/Handbook/DocCSE_NameYear.html 
SOUR CES: 
“Cite Your Sources” by University of California, Santa Cruz, University Library is licensed under CC 
BY 3.0 
“What is p lagiarism?” by University of Calif ornia, Santa Cruz, U niversity Library is licensed under 
CC BY 3.0 
An interactive or media element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view it online here: 
https://openoregon.pressbooks.pub/mhccbiology101/?p=25 
An interactive or media element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view it online here: 
https://openoregon.pressbooks.pub/mhccbiology101/?p=25 
MHCC BI101   21


[Page 28]
CHAPTER 4. 
WRITING FOR SCIENCE 
Scientific articles ar e not literary w orks. Instead, they ar e meant to transmit inf ormation effectively 
and concisel y. The need f or clarity and br evity is especiall y important f or other f orms of science 
communication such as posters w here the audience must be able to understand the significance of 
your research in just a few minutes, but the need is there for all forms of scientific communication. 
There is an explicit format that scientific papers follow, with relatively small variations in style among 
journals. Papers are broken down into the f ollowing sections: title, abstract, intr oduction, methods, 
results, and discussion. Every section, except the title, should be labeled as such. Generally the section 
name is center ed and underlined ( or bold-faced) o ver the text. Although posters f ollow the same 
format as a paper, each section is abbreviated (once again, clarity is critical). 
TITLE 
The title should giv e the r eader a concise, inf ormative description of the content and scope of the 
paper. 
 
ABSTRA CT 
The abstract is a concise summary of the major findings of the study. It should be no longer than 9-10 
sentences. It should summarize every subsequent section of the paper. It should state the purposes of 
the study, and then briefly summarize the methods, results, and conclusions of the study. The abstract 
should be able to stand-alone. Do not refer to any figures or tables, or cite any references. Because the 
abstract is a distillation of the paper, it is often written last. It is typically the hardest part of the paper 
to write. 
 
INTR ODUCTION 
In many journals, the introduction is also unlabeled, and simply starts after the abstract. 
The introduction gives the rationale for the research. It answers the question “Why should anyone be 
interested in this w ork?” It usually includes back ground information, including the w ork of others, 
and a description of y our objectives. If you are studying a particular species, giv e both the scientific 
22  LISA BAR TEE AND CHRISTINE ANDERSON


[Page 29]
(Latin) name and the common name the first time y ou mention y our study animal. The scientific 
name is al ways underlined or italicized, and the genus name is capitalized w hile the species name 
is not. C ite onl y r eferences pertinent to y our study. Dir ect quotations ar e rar ely used in scientific 
writing; instead state the findings of others in y our own words. Furthermore, footnotes are rarely 
used in a scientific paper . Instead cite the author b y last name, and the y ear that the sour ce w as 
published. 
Smith (1987) found that male mice pr efer the odor of non-pr egnant female mice to that of pr egnant 
female mice. Male mice prefer the odor of non- pregnant female mice to that of pregnant female mice 
(Smith, 1987). 
When two people  co-author a paper, both are cited: 
For instance: 
When mor e than tw o peop le co-author a paper , cite onl y the first author , and r efer to the other 
authors with the Latin phrase, “et al.”, indicating “and others”: 
Undergraduate students who came to lectures were more likely to receive a high grade on the exams 
(Thatcher, et al., 2000). 
Harrett and Garrett (1999) found no differences between male and female elephants in their response 
to the tape of a female vocalization. 
The full reference for each work must be given in the literature cited section at the end of the paper . 
For references, select w ork from the primary literatur e: that is, w ork that is published b y the same 
people who did it. In general, citing an ency clopedia or textbook is not appr opriate for a scientific 
paper. 
When organizing your introduction, begin with a general description of the topic, and then become 
more specific. F or examp le, in a study of the olfaction in the r eproductive beha vior of mice, the 
skeleton of the introduction might be: 
Each of these sentences w ould be a good topic sentence of a diff erent paragraph in the introduction. 
References should be cited where appropriate. 
For reproduction to be successful, animals must be able to correctly assess the reproductive condition of a potential 
partner. Many different signals ha ve evolved in animals to facilitate such assessment. Olfactory signals seem to be 
particularly important in mammals. 
Mice are particularly suited for studying the role of olfaction in reproductiv e behavior. Odor cues are in volved in 
several aspects of mouse reproductive behavior, including… The aim of this study was… 
MHCC BI101   23


[Page 30]
In sum, an introduction should convey your overall purpose in conducting the experiment as w ell as 
your specific objectives. 
METHODS 
This section is also often called M aterials and M ethods.  This section is a v ery concise summary of 
the subjects, equipment, and pr ocedures used. This section should contain enough inf ormation so 
that someone else could r eplicate your work. It is NOT a list, but a narrativ e description. Because it 
is a narrativ e, it should not include a list of y our materials. Rather , they should be described in the 
narrative as required. For example, you could say: “We measured 5mL of enzyme solution into a test 
tube and heated it on a hot p late until it boiled. ” From this, it is ob vious that y ou used some sort of 
tool to accurately measure 5mL of solution, as well as a test tube, and a hot plate. 
Only include inf ormation that is r elevant to y our experiment: do not include inf ormation that an y 
scientist should know to do or that won’t affect the results (label the tubes, clean up afterwards, make 
a graph). If y ou are following the methods of another paper or a lab manual, simp ly cite the sour ce. 
Then, you can concentrate on describing an y changes that y ou made to that pr ocedure. A common 
mistake is to let results creep into this section. 
 
RESUL TS 
The results includes presentations of your data and the results of statistical analysis of your data. First, 
state the overall trend of the data. Did the majority of the data statisticall y support or contradict the 
null hypothesis? 
Address each statistical test separatel y, often in separate paragrap hs. For each type of data anal yzed 
say whether your results are statistically significant, and in par entheses give the statistical test used, 
the value of the test statistic, and the pr obability level for that computed v alue. For example, “Male 
mice visited non-pregnant females significantly more often than pregnant females (chi square = 4.69; 
p < 0.05).” 
Do not pr esent your raw data. Instead, pr esent data in an easy to r ead form. You will pr obably use 
a figur e or a table to pr esent your r esults. R efer to each table b y a number (T able 1, T able 2, etc.) 
It should ha ve a concise heading at the top. Grap hs and diagrams ar e both called figur es and ar e 
numbered consecutively (Fig. 1, Fig. 2, etc.) They have headings at the bottom. Axes on graphs should 
be clearly labeled. See the section on Presenting Your Data for more information. 
You must r efer to ev ery table and figur e at least once in the text. Often this can be done 
parenthetically: “M ale mice visited non-pr egnant f emales significantl y mor e often than pr egnant 
females (chi square = 4.69; p <0.05; Fig. 2).” 
Do not use the w ord “ significant” unless it can be supported b y statistical evidence.  A common 
mistake is to discuss the implications of your findings. Save that for the discussion section. 
24  LISA BAR TEE AND CHRISTINE ANDERSON


[Page 31]
DISCUSSION 
Here you are to give a reader the “take home” message of the study. Begin by briefly summarizing the 
major findings of your study. Then discuss each finding one at a time (usually in separate paragraphs). 
Interpret your results in light of the biology you are studying. Your discussion section should parallel 
your introduction: if you discussed the role of reproductive biology of the mouse at the beginning of 
your study, come back to it again here. The paper should come full circle. 
Use references throughout your discussion to support your points. Compare your findings with those 
of similar studies. 
Do not make statements that cannot be supported b y the data, and be sur e none of your conclusions 
are contradicted by the data. Discuss unexpected results or possible errors in the experiment, but 
don’t focus on “what didn’t work”. We all know this was a classroom research project! 
LITERA TURE CITED 
Each academic discipline uses a different format to cite the references they use. These differences can 
be dramatic (English v s. Science, f or example) or small (P sychology vs. Biology), but they ar e based 
on what information is seen as important. In this course, w e follow the f ormat of the most biology 
journals by using CSE format. See the section on Citing Your Sources for more specific information. 
GENERAL HINTS 
For stylistic hints, browse one of the many books in the library on scientific writing. Remember, being 
a good writer in English “121” doesn’t mean your skills will translate to science writing without work 
(though you have a great start!). 
Outline y our paper . Use topic sentences for ev ery paragrap h. You should be able to go back and 
underline each topic sentence after you are finished. 
Keep your report as short as y ou can, consistent with clarity and comp leteness. Do not “pad” with a 
lot of irrelevant information just to show you know a lot. 
 
A note on Plagiarism:  Plagiarism is a serious academic off ense. H owever, most instances of 
plagiarism are the result of a lack of care and effort, and not intentional misbehavior. Here is a general 
rule to follow: Don’t Cut and Paste! Accidental or not, any occurrence of academic dishonesty will be 
treated seriously. Ignorance is no defense. 
Be sure to proofread for typographical errors, poor grammar, or unclear sentence structure. 
Try to start paragraphs with a topic sentence or a summary statement. Then follow it with supporting 
statements. This technique mak es your writing clear er and easier to f ollow. Ideally, someone could 
read the first sentence of each paragraph and still understand the gist of our paper. 
PLEASE avoid dull scientific writing, particularl y the use of the passiv e voice. As much as possible, 
MHCC BI101   25


[Page 32]
use an activ e voice. Passive writing tak es up mor e space and is dull, dull, dull. Look at the examp le 
here; see ho w this is mor e exciting and can lead to an inter esting ecological observ ation about the 
importance of the predator – prey relationship involved? 
BAD: M ussels ar e eaten b y sea stars.  GOOD: Sea stars eat mussels.   B ETTER STILL: Sea stars ar e 
voracious predators of mussels. 
Make sure the object to which words such as “this” or “it” refer is clear. 
Combine sentences with lo w inf ormation content into one sentence. This will mak e your writing 
more streamlined and less repetitive. But don’t write run-on sentences either! 
Always refer to work people have done in the past in the past tense. Refer to species attributes or other 
on going, continuing states in the present tense. 
The word “data” is plural. Say either “these data are…” or “this datum is…” 
BAD: W entworth (1985) studied v egetation in Arizona. H e f ound that tr ee species distributions 
followed gradients. GOOD: In the Huachuca Mountains of Arizona, both elevation and the amount of 
light influenced tree species distributions (Wentworth 1985). 
Scientific names of animals and p lants are underlined or italicized ( as are most Latin w ords), such 
as H omo sapiens or Homo sapiens (genera and all higher taxa ar e capitalized, species names ar e 
lowercase). 
Do not anthr opomorphize. A honeybee or a dandelion does not ha ve the same consciousness or 
emotional life as your roommate. In extreme forms, this type of writing is appropriate for the tabloids 
in supermarket checkout lines… 
Try varying the length of y our sentences, and keep in mind that a sentence with 4 w ords is probably 
too short, and one with 20 too long. 
BAD: Kudzu, an Asian super w eed, intends to dominate and conquer the entir e southeastern United 
States. GOOD: Kudzu is a noxious weed introduced from Asia that has quickl y spread from its point 
of introduction throughout the southeastern United States. 
Avoid using too many clauses in one sentence. If y ou see that you have a lot of commas, that is a clue 
that you’ve overdone the number of clauses in the sentence. 
Try r eading y our w ork out loud. An ything that is written poorl y will be difficult to r ead. This 
technique will alert you to problem areas in your writing. 
BE PREPARED TO WRITE SEVERAL DRAFTS! Good, hard editing will turn y ou from a mediocre 
to a good writer. And with good writing, you are able to show your GREAT thinking! 
SOUR CES: 
These instructions ar e adapted by W alter Shriner . Originally fr om Jakob, E. 1995. Labor atory manual f or 
26  LISA BAR TEE AND CHRISTINE ANDERSON


[Page 33]
animal behavior . Bowling Gr een U niversity and Muller, K . 1991. Ornitholog y labor atory. U niversity o f 
California, Davis. 
MHCC BI101   27


[Page 35]
PAR T II . 
THE PROCESS OF SCIENCE 
Learning Objectives 
Course Objective for this section:  Understand the process of scientific inquiry in order to apply the scientific method to 
biological questions by designing experiments and using the resulting data to form a conclusion 
• Design a controlled experiment to answer a biological question. 
• Predict the outcome of an experiment. 
• Collect, manipulate, and analyze quantitative and qualitative data 
• Answer a biological question using data. 
Like geology, physics, and chemistry , biology is a science that gathers kno wledge about the natural 
world. Specifically, biology is the study of lif e. The discoveries of biology ar e made by a community 
of researchers who work individually and together using agr eed-on methods. In this sense, biology , 
like all sciences is a social enterprise lik e politics or the arts. The methods of science include car eful 
observation, r ecord keeping, logical and mathematical r easoning, experimentation, and submitting 
conclusions to the scrutin y of others. Science also r equires considerable imagination and cr eativity; 
a well-designed experiment is commonly described as elegant, or beautiful. Lik e politics, science has 
considerable practical imp lications and some science is dedicated to practical app lications, such as 
the pr evention of disease ( see F igure 1.1). Other science pr oceeds largel y motiv ated b y curiosity . 
Whatever its goal, there is no doubt that science, including biology, has transformed human existence 
and will continue to do so.


[Page 36]
Figure 1.1 Biologists may choose to study Escherichia coli (E. 
coli), a bacterium that is a normal resident of our digestive 
tracts but which is also sometimes responsible for disease 
outbreaks. In this micrograph, the bacterium is visualized using 
a scanning electron microscope and digital colorization. (credit: 
Eric Erbe; digital colorization by Christopher Pooley, 
USDA-ARS) 
References 
OpenStax, B iology. OpenS tax CNX. M ay 27, 2016  http://cnx.org/contents/
s8Hh0oOc@9.10:RD6ERYiU@5/The-Process-of-Science.


[Page 37]
CHAPTER 5. 
THE NATURE OF SCIENCE 
Biology is a science, but w hat exactly is science? W hat does the study of biology shar e with other 
scientific discip lines? Science (from the Latin scientia, meaning “kno wledge”) can be defined as 
knowledge about the natural world. 
Science is a v ery specific w ay of learning, or kno wing, about the w orld. The history of the past 
500 y ears demonstrates that science is a v ery po werful w ay of kno wing about the w orld; it is 
largely responsible for the technological revolutions that have taken place during this time. There are 
however, areas of knowledge and human experience that the methods of science cannot be applied to. 
These include such things as answ ering purely moral questions, aesthetic questions, or w hat can be 
generally categorized as spiritual questions. Science has cannot in vestigate these ar eas because they 
are outside the r ealm of material p henomena, the p henomena of matter and energy , and cannot be 
observed and measured. 
Questions that can be 
answered using science 
Questions that cannot be 
answered using science 
• What is the optimum temperature for the growth of E. coli bacteria? • How tall is Santa Claus? 
• Do birds prefer bird feeders of a specific color? • Do angels exist? 
• What is the cause of this disease? • Which is better: classical music or rock and roll? 
• How effective is this drug in treating this disease? • What are the ethical implications of human cloning? 
The scientific method  is a method of r esearch with defined steps that include experiments and 
careful observation. One of the most important aspects of this method is the testing of h ypotheses. 
A hypothesis is a suggested exp lanation for an ev ent, which can be tested. H ypotheses, or tentativ e 
explanations, are generally produced within the context of a scientific theory . A scientific theory is 
a generall y accepted, thor oughly tested and confirmed exp lanation f or a set of observ ations or 
phenomena. Scientific theory is the foundation of scientific knowledge. In addition, in many scientific 
disciplines (less so in biology ) there are scientific laws, often expr essed in mathematical f ormulas, 
which describe ho w elements of natur e will beha ve under certain specific conditions. Ther e is not 
an evolution of hypotheses through theories to laws as if they represented some increase in certainty 
about the w orld. H ypotheses ar e the da y-to-day material that scientists w ork with and they ar e 
developed within the context of theories. Laws are concise descriptions of parts of the world that are 
amenable to formulaic or mathematical description. 
MHCC BI101   31


[Page 38]
REFERENCES 
OpenStax, B iology. OpenS tax CNX. M ay 27, 2016  http://cnx.org/contents/
s8Hh0oOc@9.10:RD6ERYiU@5/The-Process-of-Science. 
An interactive or media element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view it online here: 
https://openoregon.pressbooks.pub/mhccbiology101/?p=163 
32  LISA BAR TEE AND CHRISTINE ANDERSON


[Page 39]
CHAPTER 6. 
SCIENTIFIC INQUIRY 
One thing is common to all forms of science: an ultimate goal “to know.” Curiosity and inquiry are the 
driving forces for the development of science. Scientists seek to understand the w orld and the way it 
operates. Two methods of logical thinking are used: inductive reasoning and deductive reasoning. 
Inductive reasoning is a form of logical thinking that uses related observations to arrive at a general 
conclusion. This type of reasoning is common in descriptive science. A life scientist such as a biologist 
makes observ ations and r ecords them. These data can be qualitativ e ( descriptive) or quantitativ e 
(consisting of numbers ), and the ra w data can be supp lemented with dra wings, pictures, photos, or 
videos. From many observations, the scientist can inf er conclusions (inductions) based on evidence. 
Inductive reasoning involves formulating generalizations inf erred from careful observation and the 
analysis of a large amount of data. Brain studies often work this way. Many brains are observed while 
people are doing a task. The part of the brain that lights up, indicating activity , is then demonstrated 
to be the part controlling the response to that task. 
Deductive reasoning or deduction is the type of logic used in h ypothesis-based science. In deductive 
reasoning, the pattern of thinking mo ves in the opposite dir ection as compar ed to inductiv e 
reasoning. Deductive reasoning is a f orm of logical thinking that uses a general princip le or la w to 
forecast specific r esults. F rom those general princip les, a scientist can extrapolate and pr edict the 
specific results that would be valid as long as the general principles are valid. For example, a prediction 
would be that if the climate is becoming w armer in a r egion, the distribution of p lants and animals 
should change. Comparisons ha ve been made betw een distributions in the past and the pr esent, and 
the many changes that have been found are consistent with a warming climate. Finding the change in 
distribution is evidence that the climate change conclusion is a valid one. 
Both types of logical thinking ar e related to the tw o main path ways of scientific study: descriptiv e 
science and h ypothesis-based science.  Descriptive (or discovery) science aims to observ e, explore, 
An interactive or media element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view it online here: 
https://openoregon.pressbooks.pub/mhccbiology101/?p=166 
MHCC BI101   33


[Page 40]
and disco ver, w hile hypothesis-based sci ence begins with a specific question or pr oblem and a 
potential answ er or solution that can be tested. The boundary betw een these tw o f orms of study 
is often blurr ed, because most scientific endea vors combine both appr oaches. Observations lead to 
questions, questions lead to f orming a h ypothesis as a possible answ er to those questions, and then 
the h ypothesis is tested. Thus, descriptiv e science and h ypothesis-based science ar e in continuous 
dialogue. 
REFERENCES 
OpenStax, B iology. OpenS tax CNX. M ay 27, 2016  http://cnx.org/contents/
s8Hh0oOc@9.10:RD6ERYiU@5/The-Process-of-Science. 
34  LISA BAR TEE AND CHRISTINE ANDERSON


[Page 41]
CHAPTER 7. 
HYPO THESIS TESTING 
Biologists study the living w orld by posing questions about it and seeking science-based r esponses. 
This approach is common to other sciences as w ell and is often r eferred to as the scientific method. 
The scientific method w as used ev en in ancient times, but it w as first documented b y England’s Sir 
Francis Bacon (1561–1626) ( Figure 1.2 ), w ho set up inductiv e methods f or scientific inquiry . The 
scientific method is not ex clusively used b y biologists but can be app lied to almost an ything as a 
logical problem solving method. 
Figure 1 Man in historical dress with a 
ruffed collar. 
The scientific process typically starts with an observation (often a problem to be solved) that leads to 
a question. Let’s think about a simple problem that starts with an observation and apply the scientific 
method to sol ve the pr oblem. Imagine that one morning w hen you w ake up and flip a the switch 
to turn on y our bedside lamp, the light w on’t turn on. That is an observ ation that also describes a 
problem: the lights w on’t turn on. Of course, y ou would next ask the question: “W hy won’t the light 
turn on?” 
MHCC BI101   35


[Page 42]
Recall that a h ypothesis is a suggested exp lanation that can be tested. T o sol ve a pr oblem, sev eral 
hypotheses may be proposed. For example, one hypothesis might be, “The light won’t turn on because 
the bulb is burned out. ” But ther e could be other r esponses to the question, and ther efore other 
hypotheses may be pr oposed. A second h ypothesis might be, “The light w on’t turn on because the 
lamp is unplugged” or “The light won’t turn on because the power is out.” 
A hypothesis must be testable to ensur e that it is v alid. For example, a h ypothesis that depends on 
what a bear thinks is not testable, because it can nev er be kno wn w hat a bear thinks. I t should 
also be  falsifiable, meaning that it can be dispr oven b y experimental r esults. An examp le of an 
unfalsifiable hypothesis is “Red is a better color than blue. ” There is no experiment that might sho w 
this statement to be false. T o test a h ypothesis, a r esearcher will conduct one or mor e experiments 
designed to eliminate one or mor e of the h ypotheses. This is important. A h ypothesis can be 
disproven, or eliminated, but it can never be proven. Science does not deal in proofs like mathematics. 
If an experiment fails to dispr ove a hypothesis, then we find support f or that explanation, but this is 
not to sa y that do wn the r oad a better exp lanation will not be f ound, or a mor e carefully designed 
experiment will be found to falsify the hypothesis. 
Once a hypothesis has been selected, a prediction can be made that predicts what you would observe 
if you tested this hypothesis. A prediction is different from a hypothesis because a prediction describes 
what you will actually observe in your experiment. The hypothesis is the reason why you will observe 
your pr ediction. Y our pr ediction helps y ou to begin designing y our experiment b y determining 
specifically what you will be testing. 
A variable is any part of the experiment that can vary or change during the experiment. Typically, an 
experiment only tests one v ariable and all the other conditions in the experiment ar e held constant. 
The variable that is tested is known as the independent variable. A constant is a condition that is the 
same between all of the tested gr oups. The dependent variable is the thing ( or things) that y ou are 
measuring as the outcome of your experiment. 
A pr ediction often has the f ormat “If [I change the independent v ariable in this w ay] then [I will 
observe that the dependent v ariable does this ]” For example, the pr ediction for the first h ypothesis 
An interactive or media element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view it online here: 
https://openoregon.pressbooks.pub/mhccbiology101/?p=168 
An interactive or media element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view it online here: 
https://openoregon.pressbooks.pub/mhccbiology101/?p=168 
36  LISA BAR TEE AND CHRISTINE ANDERSON


[Page 43]
might be, “If you change the light bulb, then the light will turn on.” In this experiment, the independent 
variable (the thing that you are testing) would be changing the light bulb and the dependent v ariable 
is w hether or not the light turns on. I t w ould be important to hold all the other aspects of the 
environment constant, f or example not messing with the lamp cor d or trying to turn the lamp on 
using a different light switch. 
MHCC BI101   37


[Page 44]
We can put the experiment with the light that won’t go on into the figure above: 
1. Observation: the light won’t turn on. 
2. Question: why won’t the light turn on? 
3. Hypothesis: the lightbulb is burned out. 
4. Prediction: if I change the lightbulb (independent variable), then the light will turn on 
(dependent variable). 
5. Experiment: change the lightbulb while leaving all other variables the same. 
6. Analyze the results: the light didn’t turn on. 
7. Results do not support the hypothesis, time to develop a new one! 
8. Hypothesis 2: the lamp is unplugged. 
9. Prediction 2: if I plug in the lamp, then the light will turn on. 
10. Experiment: plug in the lamp 
11. Analyze the results: the light turned on! 
12. Results support the hypothesis, it’s time to move on to the next experiment! 
In practice, the scientific method is not as rigid and structur ed as it might at first appear . Sometimes 
an experiment leads to conclusions that fa vor a change in appr oach; often, an experiment brings 
entirely new scientific questions to the puzzle. M any times, science does not operate in a linear 
fashion; instead, scientists continuall y dra w inf erences and mak e generalizations, finding patterns 
as their r esearch pr oceeds. Scientific r easoning is mor e comp lex than the scientific method alone 
suggests. 
38  LISA BAR TEE AND CHRISTINE ANDERSON


[Page 45]
Figure 1.4 The actual process of using the scientific method. “The general process of 
scientific investigations” by Laura Guerin, CK-12 Foundation is licensed under CC BY-NC 
3.0 
Another important aspect of designing an experiment is the pr esence of one or more control groups. 
A control group is a sample that is not treated with the independent variable, but is otherwise treated 
the same way as your experimental sample. 
Example 1 
Tomatoes fertilized with Br and A produced an a verage of 20 tomatoes per plant, while tomatoes fertilized with Br and B 
produced an average of 10 tomatoes per plant. Y ou’d want to use Br and A next time you grow tomatoes, right? But what 
if I told you that plants grown without fertilizer produced an a verage of 30 tomatoes per plant! Now what will y ou use on 
your tomatoes? 
MHCC BI101   39


[Page 46]
Example 2 
You are interested in testing a new brand of natural cleaning product. You spray it around your kitchen sink and then take 
a sample of the bacteria remaining near the drain. You find, to your horror, that there are still 100 bacteria per square inch 
after cleaning! That seems a wful, unless you have the proper control to compare it to: the number of bacteria present on 
the surface before it was cleaned. According to W ebMD, there are more than 500,000 bacteria per square inch around 
kitchen drains. That means the cleaner actually killed well over 99.9% of the bacteria around the drain. 
REFERENCES 
OpenStax, B iology. OpenS tax CNX. M ay 27, 2016  http://cnx.org/contents/
s8Hh0oOc@9.10:RD6ERYiU@5/The-Process-of-Science. 
40  LISA BAR TEE AND CHRISTINE ANDERSON


[Page 47]
CHAPTER 8. 
TYPES OF DATA 
There are different types of data that can be collected in an experiment. T ypically, we try to design 
experiments that collect objective, quantitative data. 
Objective data is fact -based, measurable, and observ able. This means that if tw o peop le made the 
same measur ement with the same tool, they w ould get the same answ er. The measur ement is 
determined by the object that is being measur ed. The length of a w orm measured with a ruler is an 
objective measurement. The observ ation that a chemical r eaction in a test tube changed color is an 
objective measurement. Both of these are observable facts. 
Subjective data is based on opinions, points of view , or emotional judgment. S ubjective data might 
give two different answers when collected by two different people. The measurement is determined 
by the subject who is doing the measuring. S urveying people about w hich of tw o chemicals smells 
worse is a subjective measurement. Grading the quality of a presentation is a subjective measurement. 
Rating y our r elative happiness on a scale of 1-5 is a subjectiv e measur ement. All of these depend 
on the person w ho is making the observ ation – someone else might mak e these measur ements 
differently. 
Quantitative measurements gather numerical data. For example, measuring a worm as being 5cm in 
length is a quantitative measurement. 
Qualitative measurements describe a quality, rather than a numerical value. Saying that one worm is 
longer than another worm is a qualitative measurement. 
Quantitative Qualitative 
Objective The chemical reaction has produced 5cm of bubbles. The chemical reaction has produced a lot of bubbles. 
Subjective I give the amount of bubbles a score of 7 on a scale of 1-10. I think the bubbles are pretty. 
An interactive or media element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view it online here: 
https://openoregon.pressbooks.pub/mhccbiology101/?p=170 
MHCC BI101   41


[Page 48]
Example Experiment 
An experiment might be conducted to test the hypothesis that phosphate limits the growth of algae in freshwater ponds. A 
series of artificial ponds are filled with water and half of them are treated by adding phosphate each week, while the other 
half are treated by adding a salt that is known not to be used by algae. The independent variable here is the phosphate (or 
lack of phosphate). The experimental or treatment cases are the ponds with added phosphate and the  control ponds are 
those with the salt that is known to not be used b y algae. Just adding something is also a control against the possibility 
that adding extra matter to the pond has an effect. If the treated ponds show lesser growth of algae, then we ha ve found 
support for our h ypothesis. If the y do not, then we reject our h ypothesis. Be a ware that rejecting one h ypothesis does 
not determine whether or not the other h ypotheses can be accepted; it simply eliminates one h ypothesis that is not valid 
(Figure 1.4). Using the scientific method, the hypotheses that are inconsistent with experimental data are rejected. 
How man y times should y ou perf orm y our test? H ow man y samp les should be in each test? The 
answer is “as many as is feasible”. For the purposes of educational laboratory experiences, that answer 
is typically around three times. However, if you were testing a new drug, you would need many more 
than three samples in order to show that the drug was safe and effective! 
 
REFERENCES 
OpenStax, B iology. OpenS tax CNX. M ay 27, 2016  http://cnx.org/contents/
s8Hh0oOc@9.10:RD6ERYiU@5/The-Process-of-Science. 
An interactive or media element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view it online here: 
https://openoregon.pressbooks.pub/mhccbiology101/?p=170 
42  LISA BAR TEE AND CHRISTINE ANDERSON


[Page 49]
CHAPTER 9. 
BASIC AND APPLIED SCIENCE 
The scientific community has been debating for the last few decades about the value of different types 
of science. Is it valuable to pursue science for the sake of simply gaining knowledge, or does scientific 
knowledge only have worth if we can apply it to solving a specific problem or bettering our lives? This 
question focuses on the differences between two types of science: basic science and applied science. 
Basic science or “pure” science seeks to expand kno wledge regardless of the short -term application 
of that kno wledge. I t is not f ocused on dev eloping a pr oduct or a service of immediate public or 
commercial value. The immediate goal of basic science is kno wledge for knowledge’s sake, though 
this does not mean that in the end it may not result in an application. 
In contrast, applied science or “technology,” aims to use science to solve real-world problems, making 
it possible, for example, to improve a crop yield, find a cur e for a particular disease, or sa ve animals 
threatened by a natural disaster. In applied science, the problem is usually defined for the researcher. 
Some individuals ma y perceive applied science as “useful” and basic science as “useless. ” A question 
these peop le might pose to a scientist adv ocating kno wledge acquisition w ould be, “W hat f or?” A 
careful look at the history of science, ho wever, r eveals that basic kno wledge has r esulted in man y 
remarkable applications of great value. Many scientists think that a basic understanding of science is 
necessary before an application is developed; therefore, applied science relies on the results generated 
through basic science. Other scientists think that it is time to move on from basic science and instead 
to find solutions to actual pr oblems. Both appr oaches ar e v alid. I t is true that ther e ar e pr oblems 
that demand immediate attention; ho wever, few solutions w ould be f ound without the help of the 
knowledge generated through basic science. 
One example of how basic and applied science can work together to solve practical problems occurred 
after the discovery of DNA structure led to an understanding of the molecular mechanisms governing 
DNA replication. Strands of DNA, unique in every human, are found in our cells, where they provide 
the instructions necessary f or life. During D NA replication, new copies of D NA are made, shortl y 
before a cell divides to f orm new cells. U nderstanding the mechanisms of D NA replication enabled 
scientists to dev elop laboratory techniques that ar e now used to identify genetic diseases, pinpoint 
individuals who were at a crime scene, and determine paternity . Without basic science, it is unlik ely 
that applied science would exist. 
Another examp le of the link betw een basic and app lied r esearch is the H uman Genome Pr oject, 
MHCC BI101   43


[Page 50]
a study in w hich each human chr omosome w as anal yzed and mapped to determine the pr ecise 
sequence of DNA subunits and the exact location of each gene. (The gene is the basic unit of heredity; 
an individual’s complete collection of genes is his or her genome.) Other organisms ha ve also been 
studied as part of this pr oject to gain a better understanding of human chr omosomes. The H uman 
Genome Project relied on basic r esearch carried out with non-human organisms and, later , with the 
human genome. An important end goal eventually became using the data for applied research seeking 
cures for genetically related diseases. 
While research efforts in both basic science and app lied science ar e usually carefully planned, it is 
important to note that some disco veries ar e made b y ser endipity, that is, b y means of a f ortunate 
accident or a lucky surprise. Penicillin was discovered when biologist Alexander Fleming accidentally 
left a petri dish of S taphylococcus bacteria open. An un wanted mold gr ew, killing the bacteria. The 
mold turned out to be Penicillium, and a new antibiotic was discovered. Even in the highly organized 
world of science, luck —when combined with an observ ant, curious mind—can lead to unexpected 
breakthroughs. 
REFERENCES 
OpenStax, B iology. OpenS tax CNX. M ay 27, 2016  http://cnx.org/contents/
s8Hh0oOc@9.10:RD6ERYiU@5/The-Process-of-Science. 
44  LISA BAR TEE AND CHRISTINE ANDERSON


[Page 51]
CHAPTER 10 . 
REPOR TING SCIENTIFIC WORK 
Whether scientific r esearch is basic science or app lied science, scientists must shar e their findings 
for other researchers to expand and build upon their disco veries. Communication and collaboration 
within and betw een sub discip lines of science ar e key to the adv ancement of kno wledge in science. 
For this reason, an important aspect of a scientist’s work is disseminating results and communicating 
with peers. Scientists can shar e results by presenting them at a scientific meeting or conf erence, but 
this approach can r each only the limited f ew who are present. Instead, most scientists pr esent their 
results in peer -reviewed articles that ar e published in scientific journals. P eer-reviewed articles ar e 
scientific papers that ar e reviewed, usually anonymously by a scientist’ s colleagues, or peers. These 
colleagues are qualified individuals, often experts in the same r esearch area, who judge w hether or 
not the scientist’s work is suitable for publication. The process of peer review helps to ensure that the 
research described in a scientific paper or grant proposal is original, significant, logical, and thorough. 
Grant proposals, which are requests for research funding, ar e also subject to peer r eview. Scientists 
publish their w ork so other scientists can r eproduce their experiments under similar or diff erent 
conditions to expand on the findings. The experimental r esults must be consistent with the findings 
of other scientists. 
There are many journals and the popular press that do not use a peer-review system. A large number 
of online open-access journals, journals with articles available without cost, are now available many of 
which use rigorous peer-review systems, but some of w hich do not. Results of any studies published 
in these forums without peer review are not reliable and should not form the basis for other scientific 
work. In one ex ception, journals ma y allo w a r esearcher to cite a personal communication fr om 
another researcher about unpublished results with the cited author’s permission. 
REFERENCES 
OpenStax, B iology. OpenS tax CNX. M ay 27, 2016  http://cnx.org/contents/
s8Hh0oOc@9.10:RD6ERYiU@5/The-Process-of-Science. 
MHCC BI101   45


[Page 53]
PAR T III . 
THEMES AND CONCEPTS OF BIOL OGY 
Learning Objectives 
By the end of this section, you will be able to: 
• Describe characteristics that can be used to determine if something is living. 
 
Biology is the science that studies lif e. What exactly is life? This may sound like a silly question with 
an obvious answer, but it is not easy to define lif e. For example, a branch of biology called vir ology 
studies viruses, w hich exhibit some of the characteristics of living entities but lack others. I t turns 
out that although viruses can attack living organisms, cause diseases, and even reproduce, they do not 
meet all the criteria that biologists use to define life. 
From its earliest beginnings, biology has wrestled with four questions: What are the shared properties 
that mak e something “ alive”? H ow do those v arious living things function? W hen faced with the 
remarkable diversity of life, how do we organize the different kinds of organisms so that we can better 
understand them? And, finally—what biologists ultimately seek to understand—how did this diversity 
arise and how is it continuing? As new organisms are discovered every day, biologists continue to seek 
answers to these and other questions.


[Page 54]
Figure 1 This NASA image is a composite of several 
satellite-based views of Earth. To make the whole-Earth image, 
NASA scientists combine observations of different parts of the 
planet. (credit: modification of work by NASA) 
Viewed from space, Earth (Figure 1) offers few clues about the diversity of life forms that reside there. 
The first forms of life on Earth ar e thought to ha ve been microorganisms that existed f or billions of 
years before plants and animals appear ed. The mammals, bir ds, and flo wers so familiar to us ar e all 
relatively recent, originating 130 to 200 million years ago. Humans have inhabited this planet for only 
the last 2.5 million y ears, and only in the last 200,000 y ears have humans started looking lik e we do 
today. 
References / Attributions 
Unless otherwise noted, images on this page are licensed under CC-BY 4.0 by OpenStax. 
Text adapted fr om: OpenStax, Concepts of B iology. OpenStax CNX. M ay 18, 2016 http:// cnx.org/
contents/b3c1e1d2-839c-42b0-a314-e119a8aafbdd@9.10


[Page 55]
CHAPTER 11 . 
PR OPER TIES OF LIFE 
All groups of living organisms share several key characteristics or functions: 
• Order 
• Sensitivity or response to stimuli 
• Reproduction 
• Adaptation 
• Growth and development 
• Regulation 
• Homeostasis 
• Metabolism 
When viewed together, these eight characteristics serve to define life. Let’s examine what each of these 
characteristics means to in a scientific sense. 
ORDER 
Organisms, in the most basic form, consist of highly organized structures that are made up of one or 
more cells. Even very simple, single-celled organisms are remarkably complex. Inside each cell, atoms 
make up molecules. These in turn mak e up cell components or organelles. M ulticellular organisms, 
which may consist of millions of individual cells, ha ve an advantage over single-celled organisms in 
that their cells can be specialized to perform specific functions. 
MHCC BI101   49


[Page 56]
Figure 2 A toad represents a 
highly organized structure 
consisting of cells, tissues, 
organs, and organ systems. 
(credit: 
“Ivengo(RUS)”/Wikimedia 
Commons) 
SENSITIVITY OR RESPONSE TO STIMULI 
Organisms r espond to div erse stimuli. F or examp le, p lants can bend to ward a sour ce of light or 
respond to touch (Figure 1.3). Even tiny bacteria can move toward or away from chemicals (a process 
called chemotaxis ) or light (p hototaxis). M ovement to ward a stimulus is consider ed a positiv e 
response, while movement away from a stimulus is considered a negative response. 
Figure 3: The leaves of this 
sensitive plant (Mimosa 
pudica) will instantly droop and 
fold when touched. After a few 
minutes, the plant returns to its 
normal state. (credit: Alex 
Lomas) 
REPR ODUCTION 
Single-celled organisms r eproduce b y dup licating their D NA ( deoxyribonucleic acid, the genetic 
material; see Figure 7) and then dividing it equally as the cell prepares to divide to form two new cells. 
50  LISA BAR TEE AND CHRISTINE ANDERSON


[Page 57]
Many multicellular organisms produce specialized reproductive cells that will form new individuals. 
When reproduction occurs, DNA is passed along to an organism’s offspring. Genes, made up of DNA, 
are the basic units b y which traits ar e passed fr om parent to offspring.   DNA, and the inf ormation 
that it encodes in genes, is the reason that offspring will belong to the same species as parents and will 
have similar characteristics. 
AD APT ATION 
All living organisms exhibit a “fit” to their en vironment. Biologists refer to this fit as adaptation and 
it is a consequence of ev olution by natural selection, w hich operates in every lineage of r eproducing 
organisms. Examples of adaptations ar e diverse and unique, fr om heat-resistant Archaea that live in 
boiling hot springs to the tongue length of a nectar -feeding moth that matches the size of the flo wer 
from which it f eeds. All adaptations enhance the r eproductive potential of the individual exhibiting 
them, including their ability to survive to reproduce. Adaptations are not constant. As an environment 
changes, natural selection causes the characteristics of the individuals in a population to track those 
changes. 
GR OWTH AND DEVEL OPMENT 
Organisms grow and develop according to specific instructions coded for by their genes. These genes 
provide instructions that will direct cellular growth and development, ensuring that a species’ y oung 
(Figure 4) will grow up to exhibit many of the same characteristics as its parents. 
Figure 4 Although no two look 
alike, these kittens have 
inherited genes from both 
parents and share many of the 
same characteristics. (credit: 
Pieter & Renée Lanser) 
REGULA TION 
Even the smallest organisms ar e complex and require multiple regulatory mechanisms to coordinate 
internal functions, such as the transport of nutrients, r esponse to stimuli, and coping with 
environmental str esses. F or examp le, organ sy stems such as the digestiv e or cir culatory sy stems 
perform specific functions lik e carrying o xygen thr oughout the body , r emoving w astes, deliv ering 
nutrients to every cell, and cooling the body. 
MHCC BI101   51


[Page 58]
HOMEOST ASIS 
To function pr operly, cells r equire appr opriate conditions such as pr oper temperatur e, p H, and 
concentrations of diverse chemicals. These conditions may, however, change from one moment to the 
next. Organisms ar e able to maintain internal conditions within a narr ow range almost constantl y, 
despite environmental changes, through a process called homeostasis or “steady state”—the ability of 
an organism to maintain constant internal conditions. F or example, many organisms r egulate their 
body temperature in a process known as thermoregulation. Organisms that live in cold climates, such 
as the polar bear (F igure 5), ha ve body structur es that help them withstand lo w temperatur es and 
conserve body heat. In hot climates, organisms ha ve methods ( such as perspiration in humans or 
panting in dogs) that help them to shed excess body heat. 
Figure 5 Polar bears and other 
mammals living in ice-covered 
regions maintain their body 
temperature by generating 
heat and reducing heat loss 
through thick fur and a dense 
layer of fat under their skin. 
(credit: “longhorndave”/Flickr) 
MET ABOLISM 
Metabolism means taking in and using energy. All organisms (such as the California condor shown in 
Figure 6) use a sour ce of energy f or their metabolic activities. Some organisms captur e energy from 
the Sun and convert it into chemical energy in food; others use chemical energy from molecules they 
take in. 
52  LISA BAR TEE AND CHRISTINE ANDERSON


[Page 59]
Figure 6 A lot of energy is 
required for a California condor 
to fly. Chemical energy derived 
from food is used to power 
flight. California condors are an 
endangered species; scientists 
have strived to place a wing tag 
on each bird to help them 
identify and locate each 
individual bird. (credit: Pacific 
Southwest Region U.S. Fish and 
Wildlife) 
An interactive or media element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view it online here: 
https://openoregon.pressbooks.pub/mhccbiology101/?p=187 
An interactive or media element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view it online here: 
https://openoregon.pressbooks.pub/mhccbiology101/?p=187 
An interactive or media element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view it online here: 
https://openoregon.pressbooks.pub/mhccbiology101/?p=187 
MHCC BI101   53


[Page 60]
REFERENCES / ATTRIBUTIONS 
Unless otherwise noted, images on this page are licensed under CC-BY 4.0 by OpenStax. 
Text adapted fr om: OpenStax, Concepts of B iology. OpenStax CNX. M ay 18, 2016 http:// cnx.org/
contents/b3c1e1d2-839c-42b0-a314-e119a8aafbdd@9.10 
54  LISA BAR TEE AND CHRISTINE ANDERSON


[Page 61]
CHAPTER 12 . 
LEVELS OF OR GANIZA TION OF LIVING THINGS 
Living things ar e highl y organized and structur ed, f ollowing a hierar chy on a scale fr om small 
to large. The atom is the smallest and most fundamental unit of matter . I t consists of a nucleus 
surrounded by electrons. Atoms form molecules. A molecule is a chemical structur e consisting of at 
least two atoms held together b y a chemical bond. M any molecules that ar e biologically important 
are macr omolecules, large molecules that ar e typicall y f ormed b y combining smaller units called 
monomers. An examp le of a macr omolecule is deo xyribonucleic acid (D NA) (F igure 7), w hich 
contains the instructions for the functioning of the organism that contains it. 
Figure 7 A molecule, like 
this large DNA molecule, is 
composed of atoms. 
(credit: 
“Brian0918″/Wikimedia 
Commons) 
Some cells contain aggr egates of macr omolecules surr ounded b y membranes; these ar e called 
organelles. Organelles are small structures that exist within cells and perf orm specialized functions. 
All living things ar e made of cells; the cell itself is the smallest fundamental unit of structur e and 
function in living organisms. (This requirement is why viruses are not considered living: they are not 
made of cells. T o make new viruses, they ha ve to in vade and hijack a living cell; onl y then can they 
obtain the materials they need to r eproduce.) Some organisms consist of a single cell and others ar e 
multicellular. Cells are classified as prokaryotic or eukaryotic. 
Prokaryotes are single-celled organisms that lack organelles surr ounded b y a membrane and do 
not ha ve nuclei surr ounded b y nuclear membranes; in contrast, the cells of eukaryotes do ha ve 
MHCC BI101   55


[Page 62]
membrane-bound organelles and nuclei. In most multicellular organisms, cells combine to mak e 
tissues, which are groups of similar cells carrying out the same function. Organs are collections of 
tissues grouped together based on a common function. Organs ar e present not onl y in animals but 
also in plants. An organ system is a higher lev el of organization that consists of functionall y related 
organs. For example vertebrate animals have many organ systems, such as the circulatory system that 
transports blood throughout the body and to and from the lungs; it includes organs such as the heart 
and blood v essels. Organisms ar e individual living entities. F or example, each tr ee in a f orest is an 
organism. Single-celled prokaryotes and single-celled eukary otes are also considered organisms and 
are typically referred to as microorganisms. 
All the individuals of a species living within a specific ar ea are collectively called a population. For 
example, a forest may include many white pine trees. All of these pine tr ees represent the population 
of white pine trees in this forest. Different populations may live in the same specific area. For example, 
the forest with the pine trees includes populations of flowering plants and also insects and micr obial 
populations. A community is the set of populations inhabiting a particular ar ea. For instance, all of 
the trees, flowers, insects, and other populations in a f orest form the forest’s community. The forest 
itself is an ecosystem. An ecosystem consists of all the living things in a particular area together with 
the abiotic, or non-living, parts of that en vironment such as nitr ogen in the soil or rain water. At the 
highest lev el of organization (F igure 1.8), the biosphere is the collection of all ecosy stems, and it 
represents the zones of life on Earth. It includes land, water, and portions of the atmosphere. 
 
56  LISA BAR TEE AND CHRISTINE ANDERSON


[Page 63]
Figure 8 From an atom to the 
entire Earth, biology examines 
all aspects of life. (credit 
“molecule”: modification of work 
by Jane Whitney; credit 
“organelles”: modification of 
work by Louisa Howard; credit 
“cells”: modification of work by 
Bruce Wetzel, Harry Schaefer, 
National Cancer Institute; credit 
“tissue”: modification of work by 
“Kilbad”/Wikimedia Commons; 
credit “organs”: modification of 
work by Mariana Ruiz Villareal, 
Joaquim Alves Gaspar; credit 
“organisms”: modification of 
work by Peter Dutton; credit 
“ecosystem”: modification of 
work by “gigi4791″/Flickr; 
credit “biosphere”: modification 
of work by NASA) 
MHCC BI101   57


[Page 64]
REFERENCES / ATTRIBUTIONS 
Unless otherwise noted, images on this page are licensed under CC-BY 4.0 by OpenStax. 
Text adapted fr om: OpenStax, Concepts of B iology. OpenStax CNX. M ay 18, 2016 http:// cnx.org/
contents/b3c1e1d2-839c-42b0-a314-e119a8aafbdd@9.10 
An interactive or media element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view it online here: 
https://openoregon.pressbooks.pub/mhccbiology101/?p=189 
58  LISA BAR TEE AND CHRISTINE ANDERSON


[Page 65]
CHAPTER 13 . 
THE DIVERSITY OF LIFE 
The science of biology is very broad in scope because there is a tremendous diversity of life on Earth. 
The source of this diversity is evolution, the process of gradual change during which new species arise 
from older species. Evolutionary biologists study the evolution of living things in everything from the 
microscopic world to ecosystems. In the 18th century, a scientist named Carl Linnaeus first proposed 
organizing the known species of organisms into a hierar chical taxonomy. In this system, species that 
are most similar to each other ar e put together within a gr ouping known as a genus. F urthermore, 
similar genera ( the plural of genus ) are put together within a famil y. This gr ouping continues until 
all organisms ar e collected together into gr oups at the highest lev el. The curr ent taxonomic system 
now has eight lev els in its hierar chy, from lowest to highest, they ar e: species, genus, famil y, order, 
class, phylum, kingdom, domain. Thus species are grouped within genera, genera are grouped within 
families, families are grouped within orders, and so on (Figure 9). 
Figure 9 This diagram shows the levels of taxonomic hierarchy 
for a dog, from the broadest category—domain—to the most 
specific—species. 
The highest level, domain, is a r elatively new addition to the sy stem since the 1990s. Scientists no w 
recognize thr ee domains of lif e, the E ukarya, the Ar chaea, and the Bacteria. The domain E ukarya 
contains organisms that have cells with nuclei. It includes the kingdoms of fungi, plants, animals, and 
several king doms of pr otists. The Ar chaea, ar e single-celled organisms without nuclei and include 
many extremophiles that live in harsh environments like hot springs. The Bacteria ar e another quite 
different gr oup of single-celled organisms without nuclei (F igure 10 ). Both the Ar chaea and the 
Bacteria ar e pr okaryotes, an inf ormal name f or cells without nuclei. The r ecognition in the 1990s 
that certain “bacteria, ” now known as the Ar chaea, were as diff erent genetically and biochemicall y 
from other bacterial cells as they w ere fr om eukaryotes, motiv ated the r ecommendation to divide 
MHCC BI101   59


[Page 66]
life into three domains. This dramatic change in our kno wledge of the tr ee of life demonstrates that 
classifications are not permanent and will change when new information becomes available. 
In addition to the hierarchical taxonomic system, Linnaeus was the first to name organisms using two 
unique names, now called the binomial naming system. Before Linnaeus, the use of common names to 
refer to organisms caused confusion because there were regional differences in these common names. 
Binomial names consist of the genus name (which is capitalized) and the species name (all lower-case). 
Both names ar e set in italics when they ar e printed. E very species is giv en a unique binomial w hich 
is recognized the w orld over, so that a scientist in an y location can kno w which organism is being 
referred to. For example, the North American blue ja y is kno wn uniquely as Cyanocitta cristata. Our 
own species is Homo sapiens. 
Figure 10 These images represent different domains. The 
scanning electron micrograph shows (a) bacterial cells belong 
to the domain Bacteria, while the (b) extremophiles, seen all 
together as colored mats in this hot spring, belong to domain 
Archaea. Both the (c) sunflower and (d) lion are part of domain 
Eukarya. (credit a: modification of work by Rocky Mountain 
Laboratories, NIAID, NIH; credit b: modification of work by 
Steve Jurvetson; credit c: modification of work by Michael 
Arrighi; credit d: modification of work by Frank Vassen) 
REFERENCES / ATTRIBUTIONS 
Unless otherwise noted, images on this page are licensed under CC-BY 4.0 by OpenStax. 
Text adapted fr om: OpenStax, Concepts of B iology. OpenStax CNX. M ay 18, 2016 http:// cnx.org/
contents/b3c1e1d2-839c-42b0-a314-e119a8aafbdd@9.10 
An interactive or media element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view it online here: 
https://openoregon.pressbooks.pub/mhccbiology101/?p=192 
60  LISA BAR TEE AND CHRISTINE ANDERSON


[Page 67]
CHAPTER 14 . 
PHYL OGENETIC TREES 
The evolutionary relationships of various life forms on Earth can be summarized in a phylogenetic 
tree. A p hylogenetic tr ee is a diagram sho wing the ev olutionary r elationships among biological 
species based on similarities and diff erences in genetic or physical traits or both. A p hylogenetic tree 
is composed of branch points, or nodes, and branches. The internal nodes r epresent ancestors and 
are points in ev olution when, based on scientific evidence, an ancestor is thought to ha ve diverged 
to form two new species. The length of each branch can be consider ed as estimates of r elative time. 
In the past, biologists gr ouped living organisms into fiv e kingdoms: animals, p lants, fungi, pr otists, 
and bacteria. The pioneering w ork of American micr obiologist Carl W oese in the earl y 1970s has 
shown, however, that lif e on Earth has ev olved along thr ee lineages, no w called domains— Bacteria, 
Archaea, and E ukarya. Woese proposed the domain as a new tax onomic level and Ar chaea as a new 
domain, to r eflect the new p hylogenetic tree (Figure 11). M any organisms belonging to the Ar chaea 
domain live under extreme conditions and are called extremophiles. To construct his tree, Woese used 
genetic relationships rather than similarities based on morphology (shape). Various genes were used in 
phylogenetic studies. Woese’s tree was constructed from comparative sequencing of the genes that are 
universally distributed, f ound in some slightl y altered form in ev ery organism, conserv ed (meaning 
that these genes ha ve remained only slightly changed thr oughout evolution), and of an appr opriate 
length. 
 
MHCC BI101   61


[Page 68]
Figure 11 This phylogenetic tree was constructed by 
microbiologist Carl Woese using genetic relationships. The tree 
shows the separation of living organisms into three domains: 
Bacteria, Archaea, and Eukarya. Bacteria and Archaea are 
organisms without a nucleus or other organelles surrounded by 
a membrane and, therefore, are prokaryotes. (credit: 
modification of work by Eric Gaba) 
REFERENCES / ATTRIBUTIONS 
Unless otherwise noted, images on this page are licensed under CC-BY 4.0 by OpenStax. 
Text adapted fr om: OpenStax, Concepts of B iology. OpenStax CNX. M ay 18, 2016 http:// cnx.org/
contents/b3c1e1d2-839c-42b0-a314-e119a8aafbdd@9.10 
An interactive or media element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view it online here: 
https://openoregon.pressbooks.pub/mhccbiology101/?p=194 
62  LISA BAR TEE AND CHRISTINE ANDERSON


[Page 69]
PAR T IV . 
CELL STR UCTURE AND FUNCTION 
Learning Objectives 
Course Objective for this section: Discuss and apply biological theories and concepts of the cellular basis of life, including 
cell structure and function and the metabolic processes that affect cells. 
• Describe the structure and function of cellular structures contained in prokaryotic and eukaryotic cells. 
Close your eyes and pictur e a brick w all. What is the basic building block of that w all? It is a single 
brick, of course. Like a brick w all, your body is composed of basic building blocks, and the building 
blocks of your body are cells (Figure 1a-c). 
Your body has many kinds of cells, each specialized for a specific purpose. Just as a home is made from 
a variety of building materials, the human body is constructed fr om many cell types. F or example, 
epithelial cells pr otect the surface of the body and co ver the organs and body ca vities within. Bone 
cells help to support and pr otect the body . Cells of the immune sy stem fight in vading bacteria. 
Additionally, red blood cells carry o xygen throughout the body. Each of these cell types p lays a vital 
role during the gr owth, dev elopment, and da y-to-day maintenance of the body . In spite of their 
enormous variety, however, all cells share certain fundamental characteristics.


[Page 70]
Figure 1 (a) Nasal sinus cells (viewed with a light microscope), 
(b) onion cells (viewed with a light microscope), and (c) Vibrio 
tasmaniensis bacterial cells (viewed using a scanning electron 
microscope) are from very different organisms, yet all share 
certain characteristics of basic cell structure. (credit a: 
modification of work by Ed Uthman, MD; credit b: modification 
of work by Umberto Salvagnin; credit c: modification of work by 
Anthony D’Onofrio; scale-bar data from Matt Russell) 
References 
Unless otherwise noted, images on this page are licensed under CC-BY 4.0 by OpenStax. 
Text adapted fr om: OpenStax, Concepts of B iology. OpenStax CNX. M ay 18, 2016 http:// cnx.org/
contents/b3c1e1d2-839c-42b0-a314-e119a8aafbdd@9.10


[Page 71]
CHAPTER 15 . 
HOW CELLS ARE STUDIED 
A cell is the smallest unit of a living thing. A living thing, lik e you, is called an organism. Thus, cells 
are the basic building blocks of all organisms. 
In multicellular organisms, cells of one particular cell type interconnect with each other and perform 
shared functions to f orm tissues (for example, muscle tissue, connectiv e tissue, and nerv ous tissue), 
several tissues combine to f orm an organ (for example, stomach, heart, or brain ), and several organs 
make up an organ s ystem (such as the digestiv e sy stem, cir culatory sy stem, or nerv ous sy stem). 
Several systems functioning together form an organism (such as an elephant, for example). 
There are many types of cells, and all are grouped into one of two broad categories: prokaryotic and 
eukaryotic. Animal cells, plant cells, fungal cells, and protist cells are classified as eukaryotic, whereas 
bacteria and archaea cells are classified as prokaryotic. Before discussing the criteria for determining 
whether a cell is prokaryotic or eukaryotic, let us first examine how biologists study cells. 
MICR OSCOPY 
Cells vary in size. W ith few exceptions, individual cells ar e too small to be seen with the nak ed eye, 
so scientists use microscopes to study them. A microscope is an instrument that magnifies an object. 
Most images of cells are taken with a microscope and are called micrographs. 
LIGHT MICR OSCOPES 
To giv e y ou a sense of the size of a cell, a typical human r ed blood cell is about eight millionths 
of a meter or eight micr ometers ( abbreviated as μm) in diameter; the head of a pin is about tw o 
thousandths of a meter ( millimeters, or mm ) in diameter . That means that appr oximately 250 r ed 
blood cells could fit on the head of a pin. 
The optics of the lenses of a light micr oscope changes the orientation of the image. A specimen that 
is right -side up and facing right on the micr oscope slide will appear upside-do wn and facing left 
when viewed through a microscope, and vice versa. Similarly, if the slide is mo ved left while looking 
through the micr oscope, it will appear to mo ve right, and if mo ved down, it will seem to mo ve up. 
This occurs because micr oscopes use two sets of lenses to magnify the image. Due to the manner in 
which light tra vels through the lenses, this sy stem of lenses pr oduces an in verted image (binoculars 
and a dissecting microscope work in a similar manner, but include an additional magnification system 
that makes the final image appear to be upright). 
MHCC BI101   65


[Page 72]
Figure 1 (a) Most light microscopes used in a college biology lab 
can magnify cells up to approximately 400 times. (b) Dissecting 
microscopes have a lower magnification than light microscopes 
and are used to examine larger objects, such as tissues. 
Most student micr oscopes ar e classified as light micr oscopes ( Figure 1a ). V isible light both passes 
through and is bent b y the lens system to enable the user to see the specimen. Light micr oscopes are 
advantageous for viewing living organisms, but since individual cells ar e generally transparent, their 
components ar e not distinguishable unless they ar e color ed with special stains. S taining, however, 
usually kills the cells. 
Light micr oscopes commonl y used in the undergraduate college laboratory magnify up to 
approximately 400 times. T wo parameters that ar e important in micr oscopy are magnification and 
resolving power. Magnification is the degr ee of enlargement of an object. Resolving power is the 
ability of a microscope to allow the eye to distinguish two adjacent structures as separate; the higher 
the resolution, the closer those tw o objects can be, and the better the clarity and detail of the image. 
When oil immersion lenses ar e used, magnification is usuall y increased to 1,000 times f or the study 
of smaller cells, like most prokaryotic cells. Because light entering a specimen fr om below is focused 
onto the eye of an observer, the specimen can be view ed using light micr oscopy. For this reason, for 
light to pass through a specimen, the sample must be thin or translucent. 
A second type of micr oscope used in laboratories is the dissecting micr oscope ( Figure 1b ). These 
microscopes have a lo wer magnification (20 to 80 times the object size ) than light micr oscopes and 
can provide a thr ee-dimensional view of the specimen. Thick objects can be examined with man y 
components in focus at the same time. These micr oscopes are designed to give a magnified and clear 
view of tissue structure as well as the anatomy of the whole organism. 
Like light micr oscopes, most modern dissecting micr oscopes are also binocular , meaning that they 
have two separate lens systems, one for each eye. The lens systems are separated by a certain distance, 
and therefore provide a sense of depth in the view of their subject to mak e manipulations b y hand 
easier. Dissecting micr oscopes also ha ve optics that corr ect the image so that it appears as if being 
seen by the naked eye and not as an inverted image. The light illuminating a sample under a dissecting 
microscope typically comes from above the sample, but may also be directed from below. 
66  LISA BAR TEE AND CHRISTINE ANDERSON


[Page 73]
ELECTR ON MICR OSCOPES 
In contrast to light micr oscopes, electr on micr oscopes use a beam of electr ons instead of a beam 
of light ( Figure 2a,b ). N ot onl y does this allo w f or higher magnification and, thus, mor e detail, 
it also pr ovides higher r esolving po wer. Pr eparation of a specimen f or viewing under an electr on 
microscope will kill it; therefore, live cells cannot be viewed using this type of microscopy. In addition, 
the electron beam moves best in a v acuum, making it impossible to view living materials. Ther e are 
two major types of electron microscopes which differ in the images they provide: 
• In a scanning electron microscope (SEM) (Figure 2b), a beam of electrons moves back and forth 
across a cell’s surface, rendering the details of cell surface characteristics by reflection. Cells and 
other structures are usually coated with a metal like gold. 
• In a transmission electron microscope (TEM), the electron beam is transmitted through the cell 
and provides details of a cell’s internal structures. As you might imagine, electron microscopes are 
significantly more bulky and expensive than are light microscopes. 
 
Figure 2 (a) Salmonella bacteria are viewed with a light 
microscope. (credit: credit a: modification of work by CDC, 
Armed Forces Institute of Pathology, Charles N. Farmer) 
 
MHCC BI101   67


[Page 74]
Figure 2 (b) This scanning electron micrograph (SEM) shows 
Salmonella bacteria (in red) invading human cells. (credit: 
modification of work by Rocky Mountain Laboratories, NIAID, 
NIH; scale-bar data from Matt Russell) 
CELL THEORY 
The microscopes we use toda y are far mor e complex than those used in the 1600s b y Antony van 
Leeuwenhoek, a Dutch shop keeper who had gr eat skill in crafting lenses. Despite the limitations of 
his now-ancient lenses, van Leeuwenhoek observed the movements of protists (a type of single-celled 
organism) and sperm, which he collectively termed “animalcules.” 
In a 1665 publication called Micrographia, experimental scientist Robert Hooke coined the term “cell” 
(from the Latin cella, meaning “ small room”) for the bo x-like structures he observ ed when viewing 
cork tissue thr ough a lens. In the 1670s, v an Leeuwenhoek discovered bacteria and pr otozoa. Later 
advances in lenses and microscope construction enabled other scientists to see different components 
inside cells. 
By the late 1830s, botanist Matthias Schleiden and zoologist Theodor Schwann were studying tissues 
and proposed the unified cell theory. This theory has three principles which still stand today.  They 
are: 
1. All living things are composed of one or more cells. 
2. The cell is the basic unit of life. 
3. All new cells arise from existing cells. 
An interactive or media element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view it online here: 
https://openoregon.pressbooks.pub/mhccbiology101/?p=197 
68  LISA BAR TEE AND CHRISTINE ANDERSON


[Page 75]
REFERENCES 
Unless otherwise noted, images on this page are licensed under CC-BY 4.0 by OpenStax. 
Text adapted fr om: OpenStax, Concepts of B iology. OpenStax CNX. M ay 18, 2016 http:// cnx.org/
contents/b3c1e1d2-839c-42b0-a314-e119a8aafbdd@9.10 
MHCC BI101   69


[Page 76]
CHAPTER 16 . 
COMP ARING PR OKARY OTIC AND EUKARY OTIC CELLS 
Cells fall into one of tw o broad categories: pr okaryotic and eukary otic. The pr edominantly single-
celled organisms of the domains Bacteria and Ar chaea are classified as pr okaryotes (pro– = bef ore; 
–karyon– = nucleus). Animal cells, plant cells, fungi, and protists are eukaryotes (eu– = true). 
COMPONENTS OF PR OKARY OTIC CELLS 
All cells share four common components: 1) a plasma membrane, an outer covering that separates the 
cell’s interior from its surrounding environment; 2) cytoplasm, consisting of a gel -like region within 
the cell in which other cellular components are found; 3) DNA, the genetic material of the cell; and 4) 
ribosomes, particles that synthesize proteins. 
Prokaryotes diff er fr om eukary otic cells in sev eral important w ays, but they ar e basicall y smaller , 
simpler cells. A prokaryotic cell is a simple, single-celled (unicellular) organism that lacks a nucleus, 
or any other membrane-bound organelle. Bacteria are prokaryotes. Prokaryotic DNA is found in the 
central part of the cell: a dark ened region called the nucleoid ( Figure 1). Prokaryotic cells ar e much 
smaller than eukaryotic cells. 
Figure 1 This figure shows the generalized structure of a 
prokaryotic cell. 
Unlike Archaea and eukaryotes, bacteria have a cell wall made of peptidoglycan, comprised of sugars 
and amino acids, and man y have a pol ysaccharide capsule ( Figure 4). The cell w all acts as an extra 
70  LISA BAR TEE AND CHRISTINE ANDERSON


[Page 77]
layer of pr otection, helps the cell maintain its shape, and pr events dehydration. The capsule enables 
the cell to attach to surfaces in its en vironment. Some pr okaryotes ha ve flagella, pili, or fimbriae. 
Flagella are used for locomotion, while most pili are used to exchange genetic material during a type 
of reproduction called conjugation. 
COMPONENTS OF EUKARY OTIC CELLS 
A eukaryotic cell is a cell that has a membrane-bound nucleus and other membrane-bound 
compartments or sacs, called organelles, which have specialized functions. Animals, plants, and fungi 
are all eukaryotes. The word eukaryotic means “true kernel” or “true nucleus,” alluding to the presence 
of the membrane-bound nucleus in these cells. The w ord “ organelle” means “little organ, ” and, as 
already mentioned, organelles ha ve specialized cellular functions, just as the organs of y our body 
have specialized functions. E ukaryotic cells ar e larger and mor e comp lex than pr okaryotic cells. 
Additionally, eukaryotic organisms can be multicellular, while all prokaryotes are unicellular. 
CELL SIZE 
At 0.1–5.0 μm in diameter , pr okaryotic cells ar e significantl y smaller than eukary otic cells, w hich 
have diameters ranging fr om 10–100 μm (Figure 2). The small size of pr okaryotes allows ions and 
organic molecules that enter them to quickl y spread to other parts of the cell. S imilarly, any wastes 
produced within a pr okaryotic cell can quickl y mo ve out. H owever, larger eukary otic cells ha ve 
evolved different structural adaptations to enhance cellular transport. Indeed, the large size of these 
cells would not be possible without these adaptations. In general, cell size is limited because v olume 
increases much mor e quickly than does cell surface ar ea. As a cell becomes larger , it becomes mor e 
and more difficult for the cell to acquir e sufficient materials to support the pr ocesses inside the cell, 
because the relative size of the surface area across which materials must be transported declines. 
Figure 2 This figure shows the relative sizes of different kinds of 
cells and cellular components. An adult human is shown for 
comparison. 
REFERENCES 
Unless otherwise noted, images on this page are licensed under CC-BY 4.0 by OpenStax. 
Text adapted fr om: OpenStax, Concepts of B iology. OpenStax CNX. M ay 18, 2016 http:// cnx.org/
contents/b3c1e1d2-839c-42b0-a314-e119a8aafbdd@9.10 
MHCC BI101   71


[Page 78]
An interactive or media element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view it online here: 
https://openoregon.pressbooks.pub/mhccbiology101/?p=200 
An interactive or media element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view it online here: 
https://openoregon.pressbooks.pub/mhccbiology101/?p=200 
72  LISA BAR TEE AND CHRISTINE ANDERSON


[Page 79]
CHAPTER 17 . 
THE PLASMA MEMBRANE AND THE CYT OPLASM 
At this point, it should be clear that eukary otic cells ha ve a mor e comp lex structur e than do 
prokaryotic cells. Organelles allow for various functions to occur in the cell at the same time. Bef ore 
discussing the functions of organelles within a eukary otic cell, let us first examine tw o important 
components of all cells (prokaryotic and eukaryotic): the plasma membrane and the cytoplasm. 
Figure 1 A prokaryotic cell. The cytoplasm is not labeled, but is 
the light blue area inside the cell membrane. The ribosome 
label is pointing to one of the small brown dots representing the 
ribosome. 
 
MHCC BI101   73


[Page 80]
Figure 2 This figure shows a typical animal cell 
 
Figure 3 This figure shows a typical plant cell. 
THE PLASMA MEMBRANE 
Like prokaryotes, eukaryotic cells ha ve a plasma membrane (Figure 4) made up of a p hospholipid 
bilayer with embedded pr oteins that separates the internal contents of the cell fr om its surrounding 
environment. A p hospholipid is a lipid molecule composed of tw o fatty acid chains, a gl ycerol 
backbone, and a p hosphate group. The p lasma membrane r egulates the passage of some substances, 
such as organic molecules, ions, and w ater, pr eventing the passage of some to maintain internal 
74  LISA BAR TEE AND CHRISTINE ANDERSON


[Page 81]
conditions, while actively bringing in or r emoving others. Other compounds mo ve passively across 
the membrane. 
Figure 4 The plasma membrane is a phospholipid bilayer with 
embedded proteins. There are other components, such as 
cholesterol and carbohydrates, which can be found in the 
membrane in addition to phospholipids and protein. 
The p lasma membranes of cells that specialize in absorption ar e folded into fingerlik e pr ojections 
called microvilli (singular = micr ovillus). This f olding incr eases the surface ar ea of the p lasma 
membrane. Such cells are typically found lining the small intestine, the organ that absorbs nutrients 
from digested food. This is an excellent example of form matching the function of a structure. 
THE CYT OPLASM 
The cytoplasm comprises the contents of a cell betw een the p lasma membrane and the nuclear 
envelope ( a structur e to be discussed shortl y). I t is made up of organelles suspended in the gel -
like cytosol, the cytosk eleton, and v arious chemicals ( Figures 2 and 3) . Even though the cytop lasm 
consists of 70 to 80 per cent water, it has a semi -solid consistency, which comes fr om the pr oteins 
within it. However, proteins are not the only organic molecules found in the cytoplasm. Glucose and 
other simple sugars, polysaccharides, amino acids, nucleic acids, fatty acids, and derivatives of glycerol 
are found there too. Ions of sodium, potassium, calcium, and man y other elements are also dissolved 
in the cytoplasm. Many metabolic reactions, including protein synthesis, take place in the cytoplasm. 
REFERENCES 
Unless otherwise noted, images on this page are licensed under CC-BY 4.0 by OpenStax. 
Text adapted fr om: OpenStax, Concepts of B iology. OpenStax CNX. M ay 18, 2016 http:// cnx.org/
contents/b3c1e1d2-839c-42b0-a314-e119a8aafbdd@9.10 
MHCC BI101   75


[Page 82]
CHAPTER 18 . 
RIBOSOMES 
Ribosomes are the cellular structures responsible for protein synthesis. The word “synthesis” means 
“to combine things to pr oduce something else.” In this context, pr otein synthesis means combining 
different amino acids together to f orm a protein. Ribosomes join amino acids together in a chain to 
form a protein (Figure 1). This amino acid chain then f olds into a comp lex 3-dimensional structure. 
The shape of a protein is what gives the protein its specific function. 
Figure 1 Protein structure. The 
colored balls at the top of this 
diagram represent different amino 
acids. Amino acids are the subunits 
that are joined together by the 
ribosome to form a protein. This 
chain of amino acids then folds to 
form a complex 3D structure. 
(Credit: Lady of Hats from 
Wikipedia; public domain) 
76  LISA BAR TEE AND CHRISTINE ANDERSON


[Page 83]
When view ed thr ough an electr on micr oscope, fr ee ribosomes appear as either clusters or single 
tiny dots floating fr eely in the cytop lasm. Ribosomes ar e attached to the cytop lasmic side of the 
endoplasmic r eticulum. Electr on micr oscopy has sho wn that ribosomes consist of tw o pr otein 
subunits, sort of lik e a hamburger bun. Ribosomes ar e enzyme comp lexes that ar e r esponsible f or 
protein synthesis (assembling proteins from individual amino acids). 
Figure 2 Ribosomes can be found free in the cytoplasm (not 
shown in this diagram), or attached to the outer membrane of 
the nucleus and the rough endoplasmic reticulum (RER). Credit 
CFCF; Wikimedia; CC license. 
Because pr otein synthesis is essential f or all cells, ribosomes ar e f ound in practicall y ev ery cell, 
although they are smaller in prokaryotic cells. They are particularly abundant in immature red blood 
cells for the synthesis of hemoglobin, which functions in the transport of oxygen throughout the body. 
REFERENCES 
Unless otherwise noted, images on this page are licensed under CC-BY 4.0 by OpenStax. 
Text adapted fr om: OpenStax, Concepts of B iology. OpenStax CNX. M ay 18, 2016 http:// cnx.org/
contents/b3c1e1d2-839c-42b0-a314-e119a8aafbdd@9.10 
 Helpful Hint: Proteins are not typically used as a source of energy for the body . Protein from your diet 
is broken down into individual amino acids which are reassembled by your ribosomes into proteins that 
your cells need. Ribosomes do not produce energy. 
MHCC BI101   77


[Page 84]
CHAPTER 19 . 
THE CYT OSKELET ON 
If you were to remove all the organelles from a cell, would the plasma membrane and the cytoplasm be 
the only components left? No. Within the cytoplasm, there would still be ions and organic molecules, 
plus a network of protein fibers known as the cytoskeleton. 
Both prokaryotes and eukaryotes have a cytoskeleton. Both types of organisms use their cytoskeleton 
for cell division, protection, and shape determination. 
In addition, in eukary otes the cytosk eleton also functions to secur e certain organelles in specific 
positions, and to allo w cytop lasm and v esicles to mo ve within the cell. I t also enables unicellular 
organisms to mo ve independentl y. Ther e ar e thr ee types of fibers within the cytosk eleton: 
microfilaments, also known as actin filaments, intermediate filaments, and microtubules (Figure 1). 
Figure 1 Microfilaments, intermediate filaments, 
and microtubules compose a cell’s cytoskeleton. 
 
The centr osome r eplicates itself bef ore a cell divides, and the centrioles p lay a r ole in pulling the 
78  LISA BAR TEE AND CHRISTINE ANDERSON


[Page 85]
duplicated chr omosomes to opposite ends of the dividing cell. H owever, the exact function of the 
centrioles in cell division is not clear, since cells that have the centrioles removed can still divide, and 
plant cells, which lack centrioles, are capable of cell division. 
REFERENCES 
Unless otherwise noted, images on this page are licensed under CC-BY 4.0 by OpenStax. 
Text adapted fr om: OpenStax, Concepts of B iology. OpenStax CNX. M ay 18, 2016 http:// cnx.org/
contents/b3c1e1d2-839c-42b0-a314-e119a8aafbdd@9.10 
MHCC BI101   79


[Page 86]
CHAPTER 20 . 
FLA GELLA AND CILIA 
Flagella (singular = flagellum ) are long, hair -like structures that extend fr om the p lasma membrane 
and ar e used to mo ve an entir e cell, (f or examp le, sperm, Euglena). W hen pr esent, the cell has just 
one flagellum or a f ew flagella. Pr okaryotes sometimes ha ve flagella, but they ar e structurally very 
different from eukaryotic flagella. They serve the same function in both prokaryotes and eukaryotes. 
When cilia (singular = cilium) are present, however, they are many in number and extend along the 
entire surface of the p lasma membrane. They ar e short, hair -like structures that ar e used to mo ve 
entire cells (such as paramecium) or move substances along the outer surface of the cell (f or example, 
the cilia of cells lining the fallopian tubes that mo ve the o vum toward the uterus, or cilia lining the 
cells of the respiratory tract that move particulate matter toward the throat that mucus has trapped). 
Cilia are not found on prokaryotes. 
Figure 1 A cell with many cilia (short, thin “hairs”) and 
one flagella (long tail at one end). Picture from Ali Zifan 
from Wikimedia. 
80  LISA BAR TEE AND CHRISTINE ANDERSON


[Page 87]
REFERENCES 
Unless otherwise noted, images on this page are licensed under CC-BY 4.0 by OpenStax. 
Text adapted fr om: OpenStax, Concepts of B iology. OpenStax CNX. M ay 18, 2016 http:// cnx.org/
contents/b3c1e1d2-839c-42b0-a314-e119a8aafbdd@9.10 
MHCC BI101   81


[Page 88]
CHAPTER 21 . 
THE ENDOMEMBRANE SYSTEM 
The endomembrane system (endo = within) is a group of membranes and organelles (see Figure 1) in 
eukaryotic cells that work together to modify, package, and transport lipids and pr oteins. It includes 
the nuclear envelope, lysosomes, and vesicles, the endoplasmic reticulum and Golgi apparatus, which 
we will co ver shortly. Although not technicall y within the cell, the p lasma membrane is included in 
the endomembrane sy stem because, as y ou will see, it interacts with the other endomembranous 
organelles. None of the organelles that make up the endomembrane system are found in prokaryotes 
with the exception of the plasma membrane. 
Figure 1 Diagram showing the endomembrane system. From 
LadyofHats, Wikimedia, released into the public domain. 
REFERENCES 
Unless otherwise noted, images on this page are licensed under CC-BY 4.0 by OpenStax. 
Text adapted fr om: OpenStax, Concepts of B iology. OpenStax CNX. M ay 18, 2016 http:// cnx.org/
contents/b3c1e1d2-839c-42b0-a314-e119a8aafbdd@9.10 
82  LISA BAR TEE AND CHRISTINE ANDERSON


[Page 89]
CHAPTER 22 . 
THE NUCLEUS 
Typically, the nucleus is the most pr ominent organelle in a eukary otic cell. The nucleus (plural = 
nuclei) houses the cell’ s DNA in the f orm of chr omatin and dir ects the synthesis of ribosomes and 
proteins. Let us look at it in more detail (Figure 1). 
Figure 1 The outermost boundary of the nucleus is the nuclear 
envelope. Notice that the nuclear envelope consists of two 
phospholipid bilayers (membranes)—an outer membrane and 
an inner membrane—in contrast to the plasma membrane 
(Figure 3.8), which consists of only one phospholipid bilayer. 
(credit: modification of work by NIGMS, NIH) 
The nuclear envelope is a double-membrane structure that constitutes the outermost portion of the 
nucleus (Figure 1). Both the inner and outer membranes of the nuclear en velope are phospholipid 
bilayers. 
The nuclear en velope is punctuated with por es that contr ol the passage of ions, molecules, and 
RNA betw een the nucleop lasm and the cytop lasm. To understand chr omatin, it is helpful to first 
consider chromosomes. Chromosomes are structures within the nucleus that ar e made up of D NA, 
the hereditary material, and proteins. This combination of D NA and proteins is called chromatin. In 
eukaryotes, chromosomes are linear structures. Every species has a specific number of chromosomes 
in the nucleus of its body cells. F or example, in humans, the chr omosome number is 46, w hereas in 
fruit flies, the chromosome number is eight. 
MHCC BI101   83


[Page 90]
Chromosomes are only visible and distinguishable fr om one another w hen the cell is getting r eady 
to divide. W hen the cell is in the gr owth and maintenance p hases of its lif e cycle, the chr omosomes 
resemble an unwound, jumbled bunch of threads. 
We already know that the nucleus dir ects the synthesis of ribosomes, but ho w does it do this? Some 
chromosomes ha ve sections of D NA that encode ribosomal RN A. A darkl y staining ar ea within 
the nucleus, called the nucleolus (plural = nucleoli), aggr egates the ribosomal RN A with associated 
proteins to assemble the ribosomal subunits that are then transported through the nuclear pores into 
the cytoplasm (Figure 1). 
REFERENCES 
Unless otherwise noted, images on this page are licensed under CC-BY 4.0 by OpenStax. 
Text adapted fr om: OpenStax, Concepts of B iology. OpenStax CNX. M ay 18, 2016 http:// cnx.org/
contents/b3c1e1d2-839c-42b0-a314-e119a8aafbdd@9.10 
84  LISA BAR TEE AND CHRISTINE ANDERSON


[Page 91]
CHAPTER 23 . 
THE ENDOPLASMIC RETICULUM 
The endoplasmic reticulum (ER) (see Figure 1) is a series of inter connected membranous tubules 
that collectively modify proteins and synthesize lipids. H owever, these two functions are performed 
in separate ar eas of the endop lasmic r eticulum: the r ough endop lasmic r eticulum and the smooth 
endoplasmic reticulum, respectively. 
There is a hollow portion inside ER tubules that is called the lumen. The membrane of the ER, w hich 
is a phospholipid bilayer embedded with proteins, is continuous with the nuclear envelope. 
The rough endop lasmic r eticulum (RER) is so named because the ribosomes attached to its 
cytoplasmic surface give it a studded appearance w hen viewed through an electron microscope. The 
ribosomes synthesize pr oteins w hile attached to the ER, r esulting in transf er of their new ly 
synthesized proteins into the lumen of the RER where they undergo modifications such as folding or 
addition of sugars. The RER also makes phospholipids for cell membranes. 
If the phospholipids or modified pr oteins are not destined to sta y in the RER, they will be packaged 
within vesicles and transported fr om the RER b y budding fr om the membrane ( Figure 1). Since the 
RER is engaged in modifying pr oteins that will be secr eted from the cell, it is abundant in cells that 
secrete proteins, such as the liver. 
The smooth endoplasmic reticulum (SER) is continuous with the RER but has few or no ribosomes 
on its cytop lasmic surface ( see Figure 1 ). The SER’ s functions include synthesis of carboh ydrates, 
lipids (including p hospholipids), and ster oid hormones; deto xification of medications and poisons; 
alcohol metabolism; and storage of calcium ions. 
MHCC BI101   85


[Page 92]
Figure 1 The endomembrane system works to 
modify, package, and transport lipids and proteins. 
(credit: modification of work by Magnus Manske) 
REFERENCES 
Unless otherwise noted, images on this page are licensed under CC-BY 4.0 by OpenStax. 
Text adapted fr om: OpenStax, Concepts of B iology. OpenStax CNX. M ay 18, 2016 http:// cnx.org/
contents/b3c1e1d2-839c-42b0-a314-e119a8aafbdd@9.10 
86  LISA BAR TEE AND CHRISTINE ANDERSON


[Page 93]
CHAPTER 24 . 
THE GOL GI APP ARA TUS 
We have already mentioned that vesicles can bud from the RER, but where do the vesicles go? Before 
reaching their final destination, the lipids or pr oteins within the transport vesicles need to be sorted, 
packaged, and tagged so that they wind up in the right p lace. The sorting, tagging, packaging, and 
distribution of lipids and pr oteins take place in the Golgi apparatus (also called the Golgi body ), a 
series of flattened membranous sacs (Figure 1). 
Figure 1 The Golgi apparatus in this transmission electron 
micrograph of a white blood cell is visible as a stack of 
semicircular flattened rings in the lower portion of this image. 
Several vesicles can be seen near the Golgi apparatus.(credit: 
modification of work by Louisa Howard; scale-bar data from 
Matt Russell) 
The Golgi apparatus has a r eceiving face near the endop lasmic reticulum and a releasing face on the 
side away from the ER, toward the cell membrane. The transport vesicles that form from the ER travel 
to the r eceiving face, fuse with it, and empty their contents into the lumen of the Golgi apparatus. 
As the pr oteins and lipids tra vel through the Golgi, they undergo further modifications. The most 
frequent modification is the addition of short chains of sugar molecules. The newly modified proteins 
and lipids ar e then tagged with small molecular gr oups to enable them to be r outed to their pr oper 
destinations. 
Finally, the modified and tagged pr oteins are packaged into v esicles that bud fr om the opposite face 
of the Golgi. While some of these vesicles, transport vesicles, deposit their contents into other parts of 
the cell where they will be used, others, secretory vesicles, fuse with the plasma membrane and release 
their contents outside the cell. 
MHCC BI101   87


[Page 94]
The amount of Golgi in diff erent cell types again illustrates that f orm follows function within cells. 
Cells that engage in a gr eat deal of secr etory activity (such as cells of the saliv ary glands that secr ete 
digestive enzymes or cells of the immune system that secrete antibodies) have an abundant number of 
Golgi. 
In p lant cells, the Golgi has an additional r ole of synthesizing pol ysaccharides, some of w hich ar e 
incorporated into the cell wall and some of which are used in other parts of the cell. 
REFERENCES 
Unless otherwise noted, images on this page are licensed under CC-BY 4.0 by OpenStax. 
Text adapted fr om: OpenStax, Concepts of B iology. OpenStax CNX. M ay 18, 2016 http:// cnx.org/
contents/b3c1e1d2-839c-42b0-a314-e119a8aafbdd@9.10 
88  LISA BAR TEE AND CHRISTINE ANDERSON


[Page 95]
CHAPTER 25 . 
VESICLES AND VACUOLES, LYSOSOMES, AND PER OXISOMES 
VESICLES AND VACUOLES 
Vesicles and vacuoles are membrane-bound sacs that function in storage and transport. Vacuoles are 
somewhat larger than v esicles, and the membrane of a v acuole does not fuse with the membranes 
of other cellular components. V esicles can fuse with other membranes within the cell sy stem. 
Additionally, enzymes within plant vacuoles can break down macromolecules. 
Figure 13 The endomembrane system works to 
modify, package, and transport lipids and proteins. 
(credit: modification of work by Magnus Manske) 
 THE CENTRAL VACUOLE (PLANTS) 
Previously, we mentioned vacuoles as essential components of plant cells. If you look at Figure 1, you 
will see that plant cells each have a large, central vacuole that occupies most of the cell. 
MHCC BI101   89


[Page 96]
Figure 1 A generalized plant cell. Note the large grey central 
vacuole. 
The central v acuole plays a k ey r ole in r egulating the cell’ s concentration of w ater in changing 
environmental conditions. In p lant cells, the liquid inside the central v acuole pr ovides turgor 
pressure, which is the outward pressure caused by the fluid inside the cell. Have you ever noticed that 
if you forget to water a plant for a few days, it wilts? That is because as the water concentration in the 
soil becomes lower than the water concentration in the plant, water moves out of the central vacuoles 
and cytoplasm and into the soil. As the central v acuole shrinks, it lea ves the cell w all unsupported. 
This loss of support to the cell walls of a plant results in the wilted appearance. Additionally, this fluid 
has a v ery bitter taste, w hich discourages consumption b y insects and animals. The central v acuole 
also functions to store proteins in developing seed cells. 
LYSOSOME 
In animal cells, the lysosomes are the cell’ s “ garbage disposal. ” Digestiv e enzymes within the 
lysosomes aid the br eakdown of pr oteins, polysaccharides, lipids, nucleic acids, and ev en worn-out 
organelles. In single-celled eukaryotes, lysosomes are important for digestion of the food they ingest 
and the recycling of organelles. These enzymes are active at a much lower pH (more acidic) than those 
located in the cytoplasm. Many reactions that take place in the cytoplasm could not occur at a low pH, 
thus the advantage of compartmentalizing the eukaryotic cell into organelles is apparent. 
Lysosomes also use their h ydrolytic enzymes to destr oy disease-causing organisms that might enter 
the cell. A good examp le of this occurs in a gr oup of w hite blood cells called macr ophages, which 
are part of your body’s immune system. In a pr ocess known as phagocytosis, a section of the p lasma 
membrane of the macrophage invaginates (folds in) and engulfs a pathogen. The in vaginated section, 
with the pathogen inside, then pinches itself off fr om the p lasma membrane and becomes a v esicle. 
The v esicle fuses with a l ysosome. The l ysosome’s h ydrolytic enzymes then destr oy the pathogen 
(Figure 2). 
90  LISA BAR TEE AND CHRISTINE ANDERSON


[Page 97]
Figure 2 A macrophage has phagocytized a potentially 
pathogenic bacterium into a vesicle, which then fuses with a 
lysosome within the cell so that the pathogen can be destroyed. 
Other organelles are present in the cell, but for simplicity, are 
not shown. 
PER OXISOMES 
Peroxisomes are small, r ound organelles enclosed b y single membranes. They carry out o xidation 
reactions that br eak down fatty acids and amino acids. They also deto xify many poisons that ma y 
enter the body . Alcohol is deto xified by peroxisomes in liv er cells. A b yproduct of these o xidation 
reactions is h ydrogen per oxide, H2O2, w hich is contained within the per oxisomes to pr event the 
chemical from causing damage to cellular components outside of the organelle. Hydrogen peroxide is 
safely broken down by peroxisomal enzymes into water and oxygen. 
 
REFERENCES 
Unless otherwise noted, images on this page are licensed under CC-BY 4.0 by OpenStax. 
Text adapted fr om: OpenStax, Concepts of B iology. OpenStax CNX. M ay 18, 2016 http:// cnx.org/
contents/b3c1e1d2-839c-42b0-a314-e119a8aafbdd@9.10 
MHCC BI101   91


[Page 98]
CHAPTER 26 . 
MIT OCHONDRIA AND CHL OR OPLASTS 
MIT OCHONDRIA 
Mitochondria (singular = mitochondrion ) are often called the “po werhouses” or “ energy factories” 
of a cell because they ar e r esponsible f or making adenosine trip hosphate (A TP), the cell’ s main 
energy-carrying molecule. The formation of ATP from the breakdown of glucose is known as cellular 
respiration. Mitochondria ar e oval-shaped, double-membrane organelles ( Figure 1) that ha ve their 
own ribosomes and D NA. Each membrane is a p hospholipid bilayer embedded with pr oteins. The 
inner layer has folds called cristae, w hich increase the surface ar ea of the inner membrane. The ar ea 
surrounded by the folds is called the mitochondrial matrix. The cristae and the matrix ha ve different 
roles in cellular respiration. 
In keeping with our theme of f orm following function, it is important to point out that muscle cells 
have a very high concentration of mitochondria because muscle cells need a lot of energy to contract. 
Figure 1 This transmission electron micrograph shows a 
mitochondrion as viewed with an electron microscope. Notice 
the inner and outer membranes, the cristae, and the 
mitochondrial matrix. (credit: modification of work by Matthew 
Britton; scale-bar data from Matt Russell) 
 
Like mitochondria, chlor oplasts also ha ve their o wn DNA and ribosomes.  Chloroplasts function in 
photosynthesis and can be f ound in eukaryotic cells such as p lants and algae. Carbon dio xide (CO2), 
water, and light energy ar e used to mak e glucose and o xygen in p hotosynthesis. This is the major 
92  LISA BAR TEE AND CHRISTINE ANDERSON


[Page 99]
difference betw een p lants and animals: Plants ( autotrophs) ar e able to mak e their o wn f ood, lik e 
glucose, whereas animals (heter otrophs) must rely on other organisms f or their organic compounds 
or food source. 
Like mitochondria, chloroplasts have outer and inner membranes, but within the space enclosed by a 
chloroplast’s inner membrane is a set of interconnected and stacked, fluid-filled membrane sacs called 
thylakoids (Figure 2). Each stack of thylakoids is called a granum (p lural = grana). The fluid enclosed 
by the inner membrane and surrounding the grana is called the stroma. 
Figure 2 This simplified diagram of a chloroplast shows the 
outer membrane, inner membrane, thylakoids, grana, and 
stroma. 
 The chloroplasts contain a green pigment called chlorophyll, which captures the energy of sunlight 
for photosynthesis. Like plant cells, photosynthetic protists also have chloroplasts. Some bacteria also 
perform photosynthesis, but they do not have chloroplasts. Their photosynthetic pigments are located 
in the thylakoid membrane within the cell itself. 
REFERENCES 
Unless otherwise noted, images on this page are licensed under CC-BY 4.0 by OpenStax. 
Text adapted fr om: OpenStax, Concepts of B iology. OpenStax CNX. M ay 18, 2016 http:// cnx.org/
contents/b3c1e1d2-839c-42b0-a314-e119a8aafbdd@9.10 
MHCC BI101   93


[Page 100]
Theory of Endosymbiosis 
We have mentioned that both mitochondria and chloroplasts contain DNA and ribosomes. Ha ve y ou wondered 
why? Strong evidence points to endosymbiosis as the explanation. 
Symbiosis is a relationship in which organisms from two separ ate species liv e in close association and typically 
exhibit specific adaptations to each other . Endosymbiosis ( endo-= within) is a relationship in which one organism 
lives inside the other . Endosymbiotic relationships abound in nature. Microbes that produce vitamin K liv e inside 
the human gut. This relationship is beneficial for us because we are unable to synthesize vitamin K. It is also 
beneficial for the microbes because they are protected from other organisms and are provided a stable habitat and 
abundant food by living within the large intestine. 
Scientists have long noticed that bacteria, mitochondria, and chloroplasts are similar in size. W e also know that 
mitochondria and chloroplasts ha ve DNA and ribosomes, just as bacteria do. Scientists belie ve that host cells and 
bacteria formed a mutually beneficial endosymbiotic relationship when the host cells ingested aerobic bacteria 
and cyanobacteria but did not destro y them. Through evolution, these ingested bacteria became more specialized 
in their functions, with the aerobic bacteria becoming mitochondria and the photosynthetic bacteria becoming 
chloroplasts. 
94  LISA BAR TEE AND CHRISTINE ANDERSON


[Page 101]
CHAPTER 27 . 
THE CELL WALL 
The cell wall is a rigid co vering that pr otects the cell, pr ovides structural support, and giv es shape 
to the cell. Cell w alls are found in both pr okaryotes and eukary otes, although not all cells ha ve cell 
walls. In Figure 7, the diagram of a p lant cell, y ou see a structur e external to the p lasma membrane 
which is the cell wall.  Fungal and protist cells also have cell walls. 
While the chief component of pr okaryotic cell walls is peptidoglycan, the major organic molecule in 
the plant cell wall is cellulose, a polysaccharide made up of long, straight chains of glucose units. When 
nutritional information refers to dietary fiber , it is r eferring to the cellulose content of f ood. Fungal 
cell walls are made up of a molecule called chitin. 
Animal cells do not have cell walls. 
REFERENCES 
Unless otherwise noted, images on this page are licensed under CC-BY 4.0 by OpenStax. 
Text adapted fr om: OpenStax, Concepts of B iology. OpenStax CNX. M ay 18, 2016 http:// cnx.org/
contents/b3c1e1d2-839c-42b0-a314-e119a8aafbdd@9.10 
MHCC BI101   95


[Page 102]
CHAPTER 28 . 
EXTRA CELLULAR MATRIX AND INTER CELLULAR JUNCTIONS 
EXTRA CELLULAR MATRIX OF ANIMAL CELLS 
Most animal cells r elease materials into the extracellular space. The primary components of these 
materials ar e gl ycoproteins and the pr otein collagen. Collectiv ely, these materials ar e called the 
extracellular matrix (Figure 16). Not only does the extracellular matrix hold the cells together to 
form a tissue, but it also allows the cells within the tissue to communicate with each other. 
Figure 16 The extracellular matrix consists of a network of 
substances secreted by cells. 
Blood clotting provides an example of the role of the extracellular matrix in cell communication. 
When the cells lining a blood v essel are damaged, they display a protein receptor called tissue factor. 
When tissue factor binds with another factor in the extracellular matrix, it causes p latelets to adhere 
to the wall of the damaged blood vessel, stimulates adjacent smooth muscle cells in the blood vessel to 
contract (thus constricting the blood v essel), and initiates a series of steps that stimulate the p latelets 
to produce clotting factors. 
96  LISA BAR TEE AND CHRISTINE ANDERSON


[Page 103]
INTER CELLULAR JUNCTIONS 
Cells can also communicate with each other b y direct contact, r eferred to as inter cellular junctions. 
There are some differences in the ways that plant and animal cells do this. Plasmodesmata (singular 
= plasmodesma) are junctions between plant cells, whereas animal cell contacts include tight and gap 
junctions, and desmosomes. 
In general, long str etches of the p lasma membranes of neighboring p lant cells cannot touch one 
another because they ar e separated b y the cell w alls surr ounding each cell. Plasmodesmata ar e 
numerous channels that pass between the cell walls of adjacent plant cells, connecting their cytoplasm 
and enabling signal molecules and nutrients to be transported from cell to cell (Figure 17a). 
Figure 17 There are four kinds of connections between cells. (a) 
A plasmodesma is a channel between the cell walls of two 
adjacent plant cells. (b) Tight junctions join adjacent animal 
cells. (c) Desmosomes join two animal cells together. (d) Gap 
junctions act as channels between animal cells. (credit b, c, d: 
modification of work by Mariana Ruiz Villareal) 
A tight junction is a watertight seal between two adjacent animal cells (Figure 17b). Proteins hold the 
cells tightly against each other. This tight adhesion prevents materials from leaking between the cells. 
Tight junctions are typically found in the epithelial tissue that lines internal organs and ca vities, and 
composes most of the skin. F or example, the tight junctions of the epithelial cells lining the urinary 
bladder prevent urine from leaking into the extracellular space. 
Also found only in animal cells are desmosomes, which act like spot welds between adjacent epithelial 
cells (Figure 17c). They keep cells together in a sheet-like formation in organs and tissues that stretch, 
like the skin, heart, and muscles. 
Gap junctions in animal cells are like plasmodesmata in plant cells in that they are channels between 
adjacent cells that allow for the transport of ions, nutrients, and other substances that enable cells to 
communicate (Figure 17d). Structurally, however, gap junctions and plasmodesmata differ. 
MHCC BI101   97


[Page 104]
REFERENCES 
Unless otherwise noted, images on this page are licensed under CC-BY 4.0 by OpenStax. 
Text adapted fr om: OpenStax, Concepts of B iology. OpenStax CNX. M ay 18, 2016 http:// cnx.org/
contents/b3c1e1d2-839c-42b0-a314-e119a8aafbdd@9.10 
98  LISA BAR TEE AND CHRISTINE ANDERSON


[Page 105]
CHAPTER 29 . 
ANIMAL VS PLANT CELLS 
Despite their fundamental similarities, ther e are some striking differences between animal and plant 
cells (see Table 3.1). Animal cells have centrioles, centrosomes (discussed under the cytoskeleton), and 
lysosomes, whereas plant cells do not. Plant cells ha ve a cell w all, chloroplasts, plasmodesmata, and 
plastids used for storage, and a large central vacuole, whereas animal cells do not. 
 
 
REFERENCES 
Unless otherwise noted, images on this page are licensed under CC-BY 4.0 by OpenStax. 
Text adapted fr om: OpenStax, Concepts of B iology. OpenStax CNX. M ay 18, 2016 http:// cnx.org/
contents/b3c1e1d2-839c-42b0-a314-e119a8aafbdd@9.10 
MHCC BI101   99


[Page 106]
CHAPTER 30 . 
THE PR ODUCTION OF A PR OTEIN 
Proteins are one of the most abundant organic molecules in living sy stems and ha ve an 
incredibly diverse range of functions. Proteins are used to: 
• Build structures within the cell (such as the cytoskeleton) 
• Regulate the production of other proteins by controlling protein synthesis 
• Slide along the cytoskeleton to cause muscle contraction 
• Transport molecules across the cell membrane 
• Speed up chemical reactions (enzymes) 
• Act as toxins 
Each cell in a living system may contain thousands of different proteins, each with a unique function. 
Their structures, like their functions, v ary greatly. They ar e all, ho wever, polymers of amino acids, 
arranged in a linear sequence (Figure 4.16a). 
The functions of pr oteins are very diverse because they ar e made up of ar e 20 diff erent chemically 
distinct amino acids that f orm long chains, and the amino acids can be in an y order. The function of 
the protein is dependent on the pr otein’s shape. The shape of a pr otein is determined b y the or der 
of the amino acids. Proteins are often hundreds of amino acids long and they can ha ve very complex 
shapes because there are so many different possible orders for the 20 amino acids! 
100  LISA BAR TEE AND CHRISTINE ANDERSON


[Page 107]
Figure 4.16a Protein structure. The 
colored balls at the top of this 
diagram represent different amino 
acids. Amino acids are the subunits 
that are joined together by the 
ribosome to form a protein. This 
chain of amino acids then folds to 
form a complex 3D structure. 
(Credit: Lady of Hats from 
Wikipedia; public domain) 
Contrary to w hat y ou ma y believ e, pr oteins ar e not typicall y used as a sour ce of energy b y 
cells. Protein from your diet is br oken down into individual amino acids w hich are reassembled by 
your ribosomes into proteins that your cells need. Ribosomes do not produce energy. 
Examples of foods that contain high levels of protein. (“Protein” 
by National Cancer Institute is in the Public Domain) 
MHCC BI101   101


[Page 108]
The information to pr oduce a pr otein is encoded in the cell’ s DNA. When a pr otein is pr oduced, a 
copy of the DNA is made (called mRNA) and this copy is transported to a ribosome. Ribosomes r ead 
the information in the mRN A and use that inf ormation to assemble amino acids into a pr otein. If 
the protein is going to be used within the cytop lasm of the cell, the ribosome cr eating the pr otein 
will be free-floating in the cytoplasm. If the protein is going to be targeted to the lysosome, become a 
component of the plasma membrane, or be secreted outside of the cell, the protein will be synthesized 
by a ribosome located on the rough endoplasmic reticulum (RER). After being synthesized, the protein 
will be carried in a v esicle from the RER to the cis face of the Golgi ( the side facing the inside of the 
cell). As the protein moves through the Golgi, it can be modified. Once the final modified protein has 
been completed, it exits the Golgi in a v esicle that buds fr om the trans face. F rom there, the v esicle 
can be targeted to a lysosome or targeted to the plasma membrane. If the vesicle fuses with the plasma 
membrane, the protein will become part of the membrane or be ejected from the cell. 
Figure 3 Diagram of a eukaryotic cell. (Photo credit: Mediran, 
Wikimedia. 14 Aug 2002) 
Insulin 
Insulin is a protein hormone that is made b y specific cells inside the pancreas called beta cells. When the beta cells sense 
that glucose (sugar) le vels in the bloodstream are high, the y produce insulin protein and secrete it outside of the cells 
into the bloodstream. Insulin signals cells to absorb sugar from the bloodstream. Cells can ’t absorb sugar without  insulin. 
Insulin protein is first produced as an immature, inactiv e chain of amino acids (preproinsulin – See Figure 4). It contains 
a signal sequence that targets the immature protein to the rough endoplasmic reticulum, where it folds into the correct 
shape. The targeting sequence is then cut off of the amino acid chain to form proinsulin. This trimmed, folded protein is 
then shipped to the Golgi inside a vesicle. In the Golgi, more amino acids (chain C) are trimmed off of the protein to produce 
the final mature insulin. Mature insulin is stored inside special vesicles until a signal is received for it to be released into the 
bloodstream. 
102  LISA BAR TEE AND CHRISTINE ANDERSON


[Page 109]
FIgure 4 Insulin maturation. (Photo credit: Beta Cell Biology 
Consortium, Wikimedia. 2004. This picture is in the public 
domain. 
REFERENCES 
Unless otherwise noted, images on this page are licensed under CC-BY 4.0 by OpenStax. 
Text adapted fr om: OpenStax, Concepts of B iology. OpenStax CNX. M ay 18, 2016 http:// cnx.org/
contents/b3c1e1d2-839c-42b0-a314-e119a8aafbdd@9.10 
An interactive or media element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view it online here: 
https://openoregon.pressbooks.pub/mhccbiology101/?p=374 
MHCC BI101   103


[Page 110]
CHAPTER 31 . 
CHAPTER QUIZ 
An interactive or media element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view it online here: 
https://openoregon.pressbooks.pub/mhccbiology101/?p=479 
An interactive or media element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view it online here: 
https://openoregon.pressbooks.pub/mhccbiology101/?p=479 
An interactive or media element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view it online here: 
https://openoregon.pressbooks.pub/mhccbiology101/?p=479 
An interactive or media element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view it online here: 
https://openoregon.pressbooks.pub/mhccbiology101/?p=479 
104  LISA BAR TEE AND CHRISTINE ANDERSON


[Page 111]
CHAPTER 32 . 
SUMMARY TABLE OF PR OKARY OTIC AND EUKARY OTIC CELLS AND 
FUNCTIONS 
Table 1 Components of Prokaryotic and Eukaryotic Cells and Functions 
cell 
component function present in prokaryotes 
present 
in 
animal 
cells 
present in 
plant cells 
Plasma 
Membrane 
Separates cell from external environment; controls passage of organic 
molecules, ions, water, oxygen, and wastes into and out of the cell Yes Yes Yes 
Cytoplasm Provides structure to cell; site of many metabolic reactions; medium in which 
organelles are found Yes Yes Yes 
Nucleoid Location of DNA Yes No No 
Nucleus Cell organelle that houses DNA and directs synthesis of ribosomes and 
proteins No Yes Yes 
Ribosomes Protein synthesis Yes Yes Yes 
Mitochondria ATP production/cellular respiration No Yes Yes 
Peroxisomes Oxidizes and breaks down fatty acids and amino acids, and detoxifies 
poisons No Yes Yes 
Vesicles and 
vacuoles Storage and transport; digestive function in plant cells No Yes Yes 
Centrosome Unspecified role in cell division in animal cells; organizing center of 
microtubules in animal cells No Yes No 
Lysosomes Digestion of macromolecules; recycling of worn-out organelles No Yes No 
Cell wall Protection, structural support and maintenance of cell shape 
Yes, primarily 
peptidoglycan in 
bacteria but not 
Archaea 
No 
Yes, 
primarily 
cellulose 
Chloroplasts Photosynthesis No No Yes 
Endoplasmic 
reticulum 
Modifies proteins and synthesizes lipids No Yes Yes 
Golgi 
apparatus 
Modifies, sorts, tags, packages, and distributes lipids and proteins No Yes Yes 
Cytoskeleton 
Maintains cell’s shape, secures organelles in specific positions, allows 
cytoplasm and vesicles to move within the cell, and enables unicellular 
organisms to move independently 
Yes Yes Yes 
Flagella Cellular locomotion Some Some 
No, except 
for some 
plant sperm. 
MHCC BI101   105


[Page 112]
cell 
component function present in prokaryotes 
present 
in 
animal 
cells 
present in 
plant cells 
Cilia 
Cellular locomotion, movement of particles along extracellular surface of 
plasma membrane, and filtration No Some No 
Table 1 This table provides the components of pr okaryotic and eukaryotic cells and their r espective 
functions. 
REFERENCES 
Unless otherwise noted, images on this page are licensed under CC-BY 4.0 by OpenStax. 
Text adapted fr om: OpenStax, Concepts of B iology. OpenStax CNX. M ay 18, 2016 http:// cnx.org/
contents/b3c1e1d2-839c-42b0-a314-e119a8aafbdd@9.10 
106  LISA BAR TEE AND CHRISTINE ANDERSON


[Page 113]
PAR T V. 
MEMBRANES AND MOVEMENT OF MOLECULES 
Learning Objectives 
By the end of this section, you will be able to: 
• Describe the structure of cell membr anes and e xplain their function in maintaining the internal 
environment of the cell. 
References 
Unless otherwise noted, images on this page are licensed under CC-BY 4.0 by OpenStax. 
Text adapted fr om: OpenStax, Concepts of B iology. OpenStax CNX. M ay 18, 2016 http:// cnx.org/
contents/b3c1e1d2-839c-42b0-a314-e119a8aafbdd@9.10


[Page 115]
CHAPTER 33 . 
THE PLASMA MEMBRANE 
Cells closely control the exchange of substances in and out of the cell.  Some substances are excluded, 
others are taken in, and still others ar e excreted – all in contr olled quantities. Although the plasma 
membrane encloses the cell’s borders, it is far from being a static barrier; it is dynamic and constantly 
in flux. The p lasma membrane must be sufficientl y flexible to allo w certain cells, such as r ed blood 
cells and w hite blood cells, to change shape as they pass thr ough narrow capillaries. In addition to 
these more obvious functions, the surface of the plasma membrane carries markers which allow cells 
to r ecognize one another .  This is vital as these mark ers p lay a r ole in the “ self” v ersus “non-self” 
distinction of the immune response. 
The plasma membrane also carries r eceptors, which are attachment sites for substances that interact 
with the cell. Each r eceptor is structured to bind with a specific substance. The binding of a specific 
substance to its r eceptor on the p lasma membrane can activ ate processes within the interior of the 
cell – such as activ ating enzymes in volved in metabolic path ways. These metabolic path ways might 
be vital for providing the cell with energy , making substances f or the cell, or br eaking down cellular 
waste or toxins for disposal. Likewise, extracellular hormones and neur otransmitters bind to plasma 
membrane receptors which transmit a signal into the cell to intracellular molecules. Some recognition 
sites are used by viruses as attachment points. Although they are highly specific, pathogens like viruses 
may evolve to exp loit receptors to gain entry to a cell b y mimicking the specific substance that the 
receptor is meant to bind. This specificity helps to explain why human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) 
or any of the five types of hepatitis viruses invade only specific cells. 
FLUID MOSAIC MODEL 
In 1972, S. J . Singer and Garth L. N icolson proposed a new model of the p lasma membrane. This 
theory, compared to earlier theories, best exp lains both micr oscopic observations and the function 
of the p lasma membrane. This theory is called the fluid mosai c model . The model has ev olved 
somewhat over time, but still best accounts f or the structure and functions of the p lasma membrane 
as we now understand them. The fluid mosaic model describes the structure of the plasma membrane 
as comprised of man y diff erent components (including p hospholipids, cholester ol, pr oteins, and 
carbohydrates) that ar e able to flo w and change position, w hile still maintaining the basic structur e 
and integrity of the membrane. The plasma membrane is not a stiff, solid structure. It is quite fluid and 
both phospholipid molecules and embedded proteins are able to move side-to-side in the membrane. 
The fluidity of the p lasma membrane is necessary f or the activities of certain enzymes and transport 
molecules within the membrane. 
MHCC BI101   109


[Page 116]
Plasma membranes range from 5–10 nm (nanometers) thick. As a comparison, human red blood cells, 
visible via light micr oscopy, ar e appr oximately 8 μm ( micrometers) thick, or appr oximately 1,000 
times thicker than a plasma membrane. 
Figure 1 The fluid mosaic model of the plasma membrane structure describes the plasma membrane as a fluid combination of phospholipids, 
cholesterol, proteins, and carbohydrates. 
COMPONENTS OF THE PLASMA MEMBRANE 
The plasma membrane is made up primaril y of a bila yer of p hospholipids with embedded pr oteins, 
carbohydrates, glycolipids, and glycoproteins, and, in animal cells, cholesterol. 
The main fabric of the membrane is composed of two layers of phospholipid molecules. Phospholipid 
molecules have a “head” that is  hydrophilic (water-loving) and polar (Figure 2). Hydrophilic polar 
molecules “like” w ater or dissol ve in w ater. Salt and sugar ar e examp les of h ydrophilic molecules. 
The hydrophilic polar heads of these molecules ar e in contact with the w atery environment outside 
the cell as w ell as the cytop lasm (composed mostly of w ater) inside the cell.  In contrast, the interior 
of the membrane, composed of the tails of p hospholipids, is hydrophobic (water-fearing) or non-
polar (Figure 2). Hydrophilic non-polar molecules do not “lik e”  water or dissolve in water. Oil is an 
example of a hydrophobic molecule. 
110  LISA BAR TEE AND CHRISTINE ANDERSON


[Page 117]
Figure 2 Structure of a phospholipid. Notice the hydrophilic 
(water-loving) heads, which face the outside of the membrane 
and the hydrophobic (water-fearing) tails, which make up the 
inside of the membrane. Credit: “Phospholipid”; Ain wirk; 
wikimedia. 
Proteins make up the second major chemical component of p lasma membranes (Figure 1). Proteins 
are embedded in the p lasma membrane and ma y go all the w ay through the membrane, or onl y be 
present on one side or the other . Proteins that go all the w ay through the membrane can serv e as 
channels or pumps to mo ve materials into or out of the cell. Other pr oteins are found on one side 
of the membrane or the other , but do not pass all the w ay thr ough. Both types of pr oteins ma y 
serve as enzymes, as structural attachments f or the fibers of the cytosk eleton, or as part of the cell’ s 
recognition sites. 
Carbohydrates are the thir d major component of p lasma membranes ( Figure 1 ). They ar e al ways 
found on the exterior surface of cells and ar e bound either to pr oteins (f orming glycoproteins) 
or to lipids (f orming glycolipids). These carboh ydrate chains ma y consist of 2–60 monosaccharide 
units and ma y be either straight or branched. Along with perip heral pr oteins, carbohydrates form 
specialized sites on the cell surface that allow cells to recognize each other. 
The amount of cholesterol in animal p lasma membranes r egulates the fluidity of the membrane 
and changes based on the temperatur e of the cell’ s environment. In other w ords cholesterol acts as 
antifreeze in the cell membrane and is more abundant in animals that live in cold climates. 
REFERENCES 
Unless otherwise noted, images on this page are licensed under CC-BY 4.0 by OpenStax. 
An interactive or media element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view it online here: 
https://openoregon.pressbooks.pub/mhccbiology101/?p=235 
MHCC BI101   111


[Page 118]
Text adapted fr om: OpenStax, Concepts of B iology. OpenStax CNX. M ay 18, 2016 http:// cnx.org/
contents/b3c1e1d2-839c-42b0-a314-e119a8aafbdd@9.10 
112  LISA BAR TEE AND CHRISTINE ANDERSON


[Page 119]
CHAPTER 34 . 
TRANSPOR T ACR OSS MEMBRANES 
Plasma membranes act not onl y as a barrier , but also as a gatek eeper. They must allo w needed 
substances to enter and cell pr oducts and w aste to lea ve the cell. They must also pr event harmful 
material from entering the cell and they must keep essential cell materials (i.e. nutrients) from leaving 
the cell. In other w ords, plasma membranes are selectively permeable—they allow some substances 
through but not others. If the membrane were to lose this selectivity, the cell would no longer be able 
to maintain homeostasis, or to sustain itself, and it would be destroyed. 
Cells need w ays to mo ve specific materials into and out of the cell.  This ma y happen passiv ely, as 
certain materials move back and forth, or the cell may have special mechanisms that ensure transport. 
Most cells expend most of their energy , in the f orm of adenosine trip hosphate (ATP), to cr eate and 
maintain an uneven distribution of ions on the opposite sides of their membranes. The structur e of 
the plasma membrane contributes to these functions. 
SELECTIVE PERMEABILITY 
Recall that p lasma membranes ha ve hydrophilic and h ydrophobic regions. This characteristic helps 
the mo vement of certain materials thr ough the membrane and hinders the mo vement of others. 
Lipid-soluble material (hydrophobic molecules) can easily slip through the hydrophobic lipid core of 
the membrane. S ubstances such as the fat -soluble vitamins A, D , E, and K r eadily pass thr ough the 
plasma membranes in the digestive tract and other tissues. Fat-soluble drugs also gain easy entry into 
cells and are readily transported into the body’ s tissues and organs. S mall non-polar molecules such 
as oxygen and carbon dioxide have no charge and can pass directly through the membrane. 
Polar substances, with the exception of water, present problems for the membrane. While some polar 
molecules connect easily with the outside of a cell, they cannot r eadily pass through the hydrophobic 
core of the p lasma membrane. A dditionally, whereas small ions ( charged particles) could easil y slip 
through the spaces in the mosaic of the membrane, their charge pr events them fr om doing so. I ons 
such as sodium, potassium, calcium, and chloride must ha ve a special means of penetrating p lasma 
membranes. Simple sugars and amino acids (which are relatively large and polar) also need help with 
transport across plasma membranes. 
REFERENCES 
Unless otherwise noted, images on this page are licensed under CC-BY 4.0 by OpenStax. 
MHCC BI101   113


[Page 120]
Text adapted fr om: OpenStax, Concepts of B iology. OpenStax CNX. M ay 18, 2016 http:// cnx.org/
contents/b3c1e1d2-839c-42b0-a314-e119a8aafbdd@9.10 
An interactive or media element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view it online here: 
https://openoregon.pressbooks.pub/mhccbiology101/?p=237 
114  LISA BAR TEE AND CHRISTINE ANDERSON


[Page 121]
CHAPTER 35 . 
PASSIVE TRANSPOR T: DIFFUSION 
The most dir ect f orms of transport acr oss a cell membrane ar e passiv e. Passive tr ansport is a 
naturally occurring p henomenon and does not r equire the cell to expend energy to accomp lish the 
movement. In passiv e transport, substances mo ve from an ar ea of higher concentration to an ar ea 
of lower concentration in a pr ocess called diffusion. A p hysical space in w hich there is a diff erent 
concentration of a single substance is said to have a concentration gradient. 
DIFFUSION 
Diffusion is a passiv e process of transport. A single substance tends to mo ve from an ar ea of high 
concentration to an ar ea of low concentration until the concentration is equal acr oss the space. You 
are familiar with diffusion of substances through the air. For example, think about someone opening a 
bottle of perfume in a room filled with people. The perfume is at its highest concentration in the bottle 
and is at its lo west at the edges of the r oom. The perfume v apor will diffuse, or spr ead away, from 
the bottle, and gradually, more and more people will smell the perfume as it spr eads. Materials move 
within the cell’ s cytosol b y diffusion, and certain materials mo ve through the p lasma membrane b y 
diffusion (Figure 1). Diffusion expends no energy. Rather the different concentrations of materials in 
different areas are a form of potential energy, and diffusion is the dissipation of that potential energy 
as materials move down their concentration gradients, from high to low. 
MHCC BI101   115


[Page 122]
Figure 2 Diffusion through a permeable membrane follows the concentration gradient of a substance, moving the substance from an area of 
high concentration to one of low concentration. The two left sections show an example of a concentration gradient. (credit: modification of 
work by Mariana Ruiz Villarreal) 
Each separate substance in a medium, such as the extracellular fluid, has its o wn concentration 
gradient, independent of the concentration gradients of other materials. Additionally, each substance 
will diffuse according to that gradient. 
Several factors affect the rate of diffusion – 
• Extent of the concentration gradient: The greater the difference in concentration, the more rapid 
the diffusion. The closer the distribution of the material gets to equilibrium, the slower the rate of 
diffusion becomes. 
• Mass of the molecules diffusing: More massive molecules move more slowly, because it is more 
difficult for them to move between the molecules of the substance they are moving through; 
therefore, they diffuse more slowly. 
• Temperature: Higher temperatures increase the energy and therefore the movement of the 
molecules, increasing the rate of diffusion. 
• Solvent density: As the density of the solvent increases, the rate of diffusion decreases. The 
molecules slow down because they have a more difficult time getting through the denser medium. 
FACILIT ATED DIFFUSION 
Facilitated diffusi on is diffusion acr oss a membrane thr ough a pr otein carrier . This means 
that material mo ves acr oss the p lasma membrane with the assistance of a pr otein carrier do wn a 
concentration gradient (fr om high to lo w concentration) without the expenditure of cellular energy . 
The substances that undergo facilitated diffusion w ould otherwise not diffuse acr oss the p lasma 
membrane. W hen cells need to mo ve substances acr oss the cell membrane that cannot easil y pass 
through it (large molecules, polar or charged molecules ), those substances ar e often transported 
116  LISA BAR TEE AND CHRISTINE ANDERSON


[Page 123]
through a pr otein channel. The pr oteins involved in facilitated transport ar e collectively referred to 
as transport proteins, and they function as either channels for the material or carriers. 
REFERENCES 
Unless otherwise noted, images on this page are licensed under CC-BY 4.0 by OpenStax. 
Text adapted fr om: OpenStax, Concepts of B iology. OpenStax CNX. M ay 18, 2016 http:// cnx.org/
contents/b3c1e1d2-839c-42b0-a314-e119a8aafbdd@9.10 
An interactive or media element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view it online here: 
https://openoregon.pressbooks.pub/mhccbiology101/?p=351 
MHCC BI101   117


[Page 124]
CHAPTER 36 . 
PASSIVE TRANSPOR T: OSMOSIS 
Osmosis is the diffusion of water through a semipermeable membrane from a high concentration of 
water to a low concentration of water across the membrane (water is moving down its concentration 
gradient). Diffusion transports material acr oss membranes and within cells, osmosis transports only 
water across a membrane and the membrane limits the diffusion of solutes in the w ater. Osmosis is 
a special case of diffusion. W ater, like other substances, mo ves from an area of higher concentration 
to one of lo wer concentration. Imagine a beak er with a semipermeable membrane, separating the 
two sides or hal ves (Figure 1). On both sides of the membrane, the w ater level is the same, but ther e 
are different concentrations on each side of a dissol ved substance, or solute, that cannot cr oss the 
membrane. If the volume of the water is the same, but the concentrations of solute are different, then 
there are also different concentrations of water, the solvent, on either side of the membrane. 
Figure 1 In osmosis, water always moves from an area of higher 
concentration (of water) to one of lower concentration (of 
water). In this system, the solute cannot pass through the 
selectively permeable membrane. 
A princip le of diffusion is that the molecules mo ve ar ound and will spr ead evenly thr oughout the 
medium if they can. However, only the material capable of getting through the membrane will diffuse 
through it. In this example, the solute cannot diffuse through the membrane, but the water can. Water 
has a concentration gradient in this sy stem. Ther efore, w ater will diffuse do wn its concentration 
gradient, cr ossing the membrane to the side w here it is less concentrated. This diffusion of w ater 
through the membrane—osmosis— will continue until the concentration gradient of w ater goes to 
zero. Osmosis proceeds constantly in living systems. 
118  LISA BAR TEE AND CHRISTINE ANDERSON


[Page 125]
TONICITY 
Tonicity describes the amount of solute in a solution.  Three terms— hypotonic, isotonic, and 
hypertonic—are used to r elate the tonicity of a cell to the tonicity of the extracellular fluid that 
contains the cells. In a hypotonic solution, such as tap w ater, the extracellular fluid has a lo wer 
concentration of solutes than the fluid inside the cell, and water enters the cell. (In living systems, the 
point of reference is always the cytoplasm, so the prefix hypo– means that the extracellular fluid has a 
lower concentration of solutes, or a lo wer osmolarity, than the cell cytoplasm.) It also means that the 
extracellular fluid has a higher concentration of w ater than does the cell. In this situation, w ater will 
follow its concentration gradient and enter the cell. This may cause an animal cell to burst, or lyse. 
In a hypertonic solution ( the pr efix hyper– r efers to the extracellular fluid ha ving a higher 
concentration of solutes than the cell’ s cytoplasm), the fluid contains less w ater than the cell does, 
such as sea water. Because the cell has a lo wer concentration of solutes, the w ater will lea ve the cell. 
In effect, the solute is dra wing the water out of the cell. This ma y cause an animal cell to shriv el, or 
crenate. 
In an isotonic solution, the extracellular fluid has the same osmolarity as the cell. If the concentration 
of solutes of the cell matches that of the extracellular fluid, ther e will be no net mo vement of 
water into or out of the cell. B lood cells in h ypertonic, isotonic, and h ypotonic solutions tak e on 
characteristic appearances (Figure 2). 
Figure 2 Osmotic pressure changes the shape of red blood cells 
in hypertonic, isotonic, and hypotonic solutions. (credit: 
modification of work by Mariana Ruiz Villarreal) 
Some organisms, such as p lants, fungi, bacteria, and some pr otists, ha ve cell w alls that surr ound 
the plasma membrane and pr event cell l ysis. The p lasma membrane can onl y expand to the limit of 
the cell w all, so the cell will not l yse. In fact, the cytop lasm in p lants is al ways slightl y hypertonic 
compared to the cellular en vironment, and w ater will al ways enter a cell if w ater is a vailable. This 
influx of w ater pr oduces turgor pr essure, w hich stiff ens the cell w alls of the p lant ( Figure 3 ). In 
nonwoody plants, turgor pressure supports the p lant. If the p lant cells become hypertonic, as occurs 
in drought or if a plant is not watered adequately, water will leave the cell. Plants lose turgor pressure 
in this condition and wilt. 
MHCC BI101   119


[Page 126]
Figure 3 The turgor pressure within a plant cell depends on the 
tonicity of the solution that it is bathed in. (credit: modification 
of work by Mariana Ruiz Villarreal) 
REFERENCES 
Unless otherwise noted, images on this page are licensed under CC-BY 4.0 by OpenStax. 
Text adapted fr om: OpenStax, Concepts of B iology. OpenStax CNX. M ay 18, 2016 http:// cnx.org/
contents/b3c1e1d2-839c-42b0-a314-e119a8aafbdd@9.10 
An interactive or media element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view it online here: 
https://openoregon.pressbooks.pub/mhccbiology101/?p=239 
An interactive or media element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view it online here: 
https://openoregon.pressbooks.pub/mhccbiology101/?p=239 
An interactive or media element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view it online here: 
https://openoregon.pressbooks.pub/mhccbiology101/?p=239 
120  LISA BAR TEE AND CHRISTINE ANDERSON


[Page 127]
CHAPTER 37 . 
ACTIVE TRANSPOR T 
Active transport mechanisms require the use of the cell’ s energy, usually in the f orm of adenosine 
triphosphate (ATP). If a substance must mo ve into the cell against its concentration gradient, that 
is, if the concentration of the substance inside the cell must be gr eater than its concentration in the 
extracellular fluid, the cell must use energy to move the substance. Some active transport mechanisms 
move small-molecular weight material, such as ions, through the membrane. 
In addition to mo ving small ions and molecules thr ough the membrane, cells also need to r emove 
and take in larger molecules and particles. Some cells ar e even capable of engulfing entire unicellular 
microorganisms. You might have correctly hypothesized that the uptake and release of large particles 
by the cell r equires energy. A large particle, ho wever, cannot pass thr ough the membrane, ev en with 
energy supplied by the cell. 
MO VING AGAINST A GRADIENT 
To mo ve substances against a concentration gradient, the cell must use energy . This energy is 
harvested fr om ATP that is generated thr ough cellular metabolism. A ctive transport mechanisms, 
collectively called pumps or carrier pr oteins, w ork against concentration gradients. W ith the 
exception of ions, small substances constantl y pass thr ough p lasma membranes. A ctive transport 
maintains concentrations of ions and other substances needed b y living cells in the face of these 
passive changes. M uch of a cell’ s supp ly of metabolic energy ma y be spent maintaining these 
processes. As activ e transport mechanisms depend on cellular metabolism f or energy , they ar e 
sensitive to many metabolic poisons that interfere with the supply of ATP. 
ENDOCYT OSIS 
Endocytosis is a type of activ e transport that mo ves particles, such as large molecules, parts of cells, 
and even whole cells, into a cell. There are different variations of endocytosis, but all share a common 
characteristic: The p lasma membrane of the cell in vaginates, f orming a pock et ar ound the target 
particle. The pocket pinches off, r esulting in the particle being contained in a new ly created vacuole 
that is formed from the plasma membrane. Several specific types of endocytosis can be seen in Figure 
1. 
MHCC BI101   121


[Page 128]
Figure 1 Three variations of endocytosis are shown. (a) In one form of endocytosis, phagocytosis, the cell membrane surrounds the particle 
and pinches off to form an intracellular vacuole. (b) In another type of endocytosis, pinocytosis, the cell membrane surrounds a small volume 
of fluid and pinches off, forming a vesicle. (c) In receptor-mediated endocytosis, uptake of substances by the cell is targeted to a single type of 
substance that binds at the receptor on the external cell membrane. (credit: modification of work by Mariana Ruiz Villarreal) 
EX OCYT OSIS 
In contrast to these methods of mo ving material into a cell is the pr ocess of ex ocytosis. Exocytosis
is the opposite of the pr ocesses discussed above in that its purpose is to expel material fr om the cell 
into the extracellular fluid. A particle en veloped in membrane fuses with the interior of the p lasma 
membrane. This fusion opens the membranous envelope to the exterior of the cell, and the particle is 
expelled into the extracellular space (Figure 2). 
 
122  LISA BAR TEE AND CHRISTINE ANDERSON


[Page 129]
Figure 2 In exocytosis, a vesicle migrates to the plasma 
membrane, binds, and releases its contents to the 
outside of the cell. (credit: modification of work by 
Mariana Ruiz Villarreal) 
REFERENCES 
Unless otherwise noted, images on this page are licensed under CC-BY 4.0 by OpenStax. 
Text adapted fr om: OpenStax, Concepts of B iology. OpenStax CNX. M ay 18, 2016 http:// cnx.org/
contents/b3c1e1d2-839c-42b0-a314-e119a8aafbdd@9.10 
An interactive or media element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view it online here: 
https://openoregon.pressbooks.pub/mhccbiology101/?p=241 
An interactive or media element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view it online here: 
https://openoregon.pressbooks.pub/mhccbiology101/?p=241 
MHCC BI101   123


[Page 131]
PAR T VI . 
ENZYME-CA TALYZED REA CTIONS 
Learning Objectives 
By the end of this section, you will be able to: 
• Explain the role of enzyme-catalyzed reactions in cellular metabolism. 
Figure 1 A hummingbird needs energy to maintain prolonged 
flight. The bird obtains its energy from taking in food and 
transforming the energy contained in food molecules into forms 
of energy to power its flight through a series of biochemical 
reactions. (credit: modification of work by Cory Zanker) 
Virtually ev ery task perf ormed b y living organisms r equires energy. Energy is needed to perf orm 
heavy labor and ex ercise, but humans also use energy w hile thinking, and ev en during sleep. In fact, 
the living cells of every organism constantly use energy. Nutrients and other molecules are imported 
into the cell ha ve many different potential paths: metabolized (br oken down) and used f or energy, 
synthesized into new molecules, modified if needed, transported around the cell, and even distributed 
to the entir e organism. For example, the large pr oteins that make up muscles ar e built fr om smaller


[Page 132]
molecules imported from dietary amino acids. Comp lex carbohydrates are broken down into simple 
sugars that the cell uses f or energy. Just as energy is r equired to both build and demolish a building, 
energy is required for the synthesis and breakdown of molecules as well as the transport of molecules 
into and out of cells. In addition, pr ocesses such as ingesting and breaking down pathogenic bacteria 
and viruses, exporting wastes and toxins, and movement of the cell require energy. 
References 
Unless otherwise noted, images on this page are licensed under CC-BY 4.0 by OpenStax. 
Text adapted fr om: OpenStax, Concepts of B iology. OpenStax CNX. M ay 18, 2016 http:// cnx.org/
contents/b3c1e1d2-839c-42b0-a314-e119a8aafbdd@9.10


[Page 133]
CHAPTER 38 . 
MET ABOLIC PATHW AYS 
Consider the metabolism of sugar . This is a classic examp le of one of the man y cellular pr ocesses 
that use and pr oduce energy. Living things consume sugars as a major energy sour ce, because sugar 
molecules have a great deal of energy stored within their bonds. For the most part, photosynthesizing 
organisms like plants produce these sugars. During photosynthesis, plants use energy (originally from 
sunlight) to con vert carbon dio xide gas ( CO2) into sugar molecules (lik e glucose: C 6H12O6). They 
consume carbon dioxide and produce oxygen as a waste product. This reaction is summarized as: 
6 CO2 + 6 H2O –> C6H12O6 + 6 O2 
Because this pr ocess in volves synthesizing an energy -storing molecule, it r equires energy input 
to pr oceed. During the light r eactions of p hotosynthesis, energy is pr ovided b y a molecule called 
adenosine triphosphate (ATP), which is the primary energy curr ency of all cells. J ust as the dollar is 
used as currency to buy goods, cells use molecules of A TP as energy currency to perform immediate 
work. In contrast, energy-storage molecules such as glucose are consumed only to be broken down to 
use their energy. The reaction that harvests the energy of a sugar molecule in cells r equiring oxygen 
to survive can be summarized b y the r everse reaction to p hotosynthesis. In this r eaction, oxygen is 
consumed and carbon dioxide is released as a waste product. The reaction is summarized as: 
C6H12O6 + 6 O2 –> 6 CO2 + 6 H2O 
Both of these reactions involve many steps. 
The processes of making and br eaking down sugar molecules illustrate tw o examples of metabolic 
pathways. A metabolic pathway is a series of chemical r eactions that takes a starting molecule and 
modifies it, step-b y-step, thr ough a series of metabolic intermediates, ev entually yielding a final 
product. In the examp le of sugar metabolism, the first metabolic path way synthesized sugar fr om 
smaller molecules, and the other path way br oke sugar do wn into smaller molecules. These tw o 
opposite pr ocesses—the first r equiring energy and the second pr oducing energy —are r eferred to 
as anabolic pathways (building pol ymers) and catabolic pathways (br eaking do wn pol ymers into 
their monomers), respectively. Consequently, metabolism is composed of synthesis ( anabolism) and 
degradation (catabolism) (Figure 1). 
It is important to kno w that the chemical r eactions of metabolic path ways do not tak e p lace on 
their own. Each reaction step is facilitated, or catalyzed, by a protein called an enzyme. Enzymes are 
MHCC BI101   127


[Page 134]
important for catalyzing all types of biological r eactions—those that r equire energy as w ell as those 
that release energy. 
Figure 1 Catabolic pathways are those that generate energy by 
breaking down larger molecules. Anabolic pathways are those 
that require energy to synthesize larger molecules. Both types 
of pathways are required for maintaining the cell’s energy 
balance. 
REFERENCES 
Unless otherwise noted, images on this page are licensed under CC-BY 4.0 by OpenStax. 
Text adapted fr om: OpenStax, Concepts of B iology. OpenStax CNX. M ay 18, 2016 http:// cnx.org/
contents/b3c1e1d2-839c-42b0-a314-e119a8aafbdd@9.10 
An interactive or media element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view it online here: 
https://openoregon.pressbooks.pub/mhccbiology101/?p=247 
128  LISA BAR TEE AND CHRISTINE ANDERSON


[Page 135]
CHAPTER 39 . 
ENER GY 
ENER GY 
Energy is constantly being moved between different molecules within a cell. Cellular pr ocesses such 
as the building and br eaking down of complex molecules occur through multiple chemical reactions 
that occur in a specific or der. Some of these chemical r eactions are spontaneous and r elease energy, 
whereas others require energy to proceed. 
Just as living things must continuall y consume f ood to r eplenish their energy supp lies, cells must 
continually pr oduce mor e energy to r eplenish that used b y the man y energy -requiring chemical 
reactions that constantly take place. Together, all of the chemical reactions that take place inside cells, 
including those that consume or generate energy, are referred to as the cell’s metabolism. 
Biological organisms are open systems. Energy is exchanged between them and their surroundings as 
they use energy fr om the sun to perf orm photosynthesis or consume energy -storing molecules and 
release energy to the en vironment by doing w ork and r eleasing heat. Lik e all things in the p hysical 
world, energy is subject to p hysical laws. The laws of thermodynamics govern the transfer of energy 
in and among all systems in the universe. 
In general, energy is defined as the ability to do work, or to create some kind of change. Energy exists 
in different forms. For example, electrical energy, light energy, and heat energy are all different types 
of energy. To appreciate the w ay energy flo ws into and out of biological sy stems, it is important to 
understand two of the physical laws that govern energy. 
 
MHCC BI101   129


[Page 136]
Figure 1 Ultimately, most life forms get their energy 
from the sun. Plants use photosynthesis to capture 
sunlight, and herbivores eat the plants to obtain 
energy. Carnivores eat the herbivores, and eventual 
decomposition of plant and animal material 
contributes to the nutrient pool. 
PO TENTIAL VS KINETIC ENER GY 
When an object is in motion, ther e is energy associated with that object. Think of a wr ecking ball. 
Even a slow-moving wrecking ball can do a gr eat deal of damage to other objects. Energy associated 
with objects in motion is called kinetic energy (Figure 2). A speeding bullet, a walking person, and the 
rapid movement of molecules in the air (which produces heat) all have kinetic energy. Water turning a 
turbine in the dam or a ball rolling down a hill are examples of potential energy being converted into 
kinetic energy. The energy stored in ATP being used to power active transport of molecules acr oss a 
membrane is an example of kinetic energy. 
Now what if that same motionless wr ecking ball is lifted tw o stories abo ve ground with a crane? If 
the suspended wrecking ball is unmo ving, is there energy associated with it? The answ er is yes. The 
energy that was required to lift the wrecking ball did not disappear, but is now stored in the wrecking 
ball by virtue of its position and the force of gravity acting on it. This type of energy is called potential 
energy (Figure 2 ). If the ball w ere to fall, the potential energy w ould be transf ormed into kinetic 
energy until all of the potential energy w as exhausted when the ball rested on the ground. Wrecking 
balls also swing lik e a pendulum; thr ough the swing, ther e is a constant change of potential energy 
(highest at the top of the swing) to kinetic energy (highest at the bottom of the swing). Other examples 
of potential energy include the energy of water held behind a dam or a person about to skydive out of 
an airplane. A ball at the top of a hill has potential energy. 
130  LISA BAR TEE AND CHRISTINE ANDERSON


[Page 137]
Figure 2 Still water has potential energy; moving water, such as 
in a waterfall or a rapidly flowing river, has kinetic energy. 
(credit “dam”: modification of work by “Pascal”/Flickr; credit 
“waterfall”: modification of work by Frank Gualtieri) 
Potential energy is not onl y associated with the location of matter , but also with the structure of 
matter. A spring on the gr ound has potential energy if it is compr essed; so does a rubber band that 
is pulled taut. On a molecular lev el, the bonds that hold the atoms of molecules together exist in 
a particular structur e that has potential energy . R emember that anabolic cellular path ways require 
energy to synthesize comp lex molecules fr om simp ler ones and catabolic path ways release energy 
when complex molecules ar e broken down. The fact that energy can be r eleased by the br eakdown 
of certain chemical bonds imp lies that those bonds ha ve potential energy . In fact, ther e is potential 
energy stored within the bonds of all the f ood molecules w e eat, w hich is ev entually harnessed f or 
use. This is because these bonds can r elease energy w hen broken. The type of potential energy that 
exists within chemical bonds, and is released when those bonds are broken, is called chemical energy. 
Chemical energy is responsible for providing living cells with energy from food. The release of energy 
occurs when the molecular bonds within food molecules are broken. 
THERMOD YNAMICS 
Thermodynamics refers to the study of energy and energy transf er involving physical matter. The 
matter relevant to a particular case of energy transfer is called a system, and everything outside of that 
matter is called the surr oundings. For instance, when heating a pot of w ater on the stove, the system 
includes the stove, the pot, and the water. Energy is transferred within the system (between the stove, 
pot, and w ater). There are two types of sy stems: open and closed. In an open sy stem, energy can be 
exchanged with its surr oundings. The sto vetop system is open because heat can be lost to the air . A 
closed system cannot exchange energy with its surroundings. 
The first la w of thermodynamics states that the total amount of energy in the univ erse is constant 
and conserved. In other w ords, there has al ways been, and al ways will be, exactl y the same amount 
of energy in the univ erse. Energy exists in man y diff erent f orms. A ccording to the first la w of 
thermodynamics, energy may be transferred from place to place or transformed into different forms, 
but it cannot be created or destroyed. The transfers and transformations of energy take place around 
us all the time. Light bulbs transform electrical energy into light and heat energy. Gas stoves transform 
chemical energy from natural gas into heat energy. Plants perform one of the most biologically useful 
energy transformations on earth: that of converting the energy of sunlight to chemical energy stor ed 
within organic molecules. Some examples of energy transformations are shown in Figure 1. 
MHCC BI101   131


[Page 138]
The challenge f or all living organisms is to obtain energy fr om their surr oundings in f orms that 
they can transfer or transform into usable energy to do w ork. Living cells ha ve evolved to meet this 
challenge. Chemical energy stor ed within organic molecules such as sugars and fats is transf erred 
and transf ormed thr ough a series of cellular chemical r eactions into energy within molecules of 
ATP (adenosine triphosphate). Energy in ATP molecules is easil y accessible to do w ork. Examples of 
the types of w ork that cells need to do include building comp lex molecules, transporting materials, 
powering the motion of cilia or flagella, and contracting muscle fibers to create movement. 
Figure 1 Shown are some examples of energy 
transferred and transformed from one system 
to another and from one form to another. 
(credit “ice cream”: modification of work by D. 
Sharon Pruitt; credit “kids”: modification of 
work by Max from Providence; credit “leaf”: 
modification of work by Cory Zanker) 
A living cell’ s primary tasks of obtaining, transf orming, and using energy to do w ork ma y seem 
simple. However, the second la w of thermodynamics exp lains why these tasks ar e harder than they 
appear. All energy transf ers and transf ormations ar e nev er comp letely efficient. In ev ery energy 
transfer, some amount of energy is lost in a f orm that is unusable. In most cases, this f orm is heat 
energy. Thermodynamicall y, heat ener gy is defined as the energy transf erred fr om one sy stem to 
another that is not w ork. F or examp le, w hen a light bulb is turned on, some of the energy being 
converted from electrical energy into light energy is lost as heat energy. Likewise, some energy is lost 
as heat energy during cellular metabolic reactions. 
An important concept in p hysical systems is that of or der and disorder. The more energy that is lost 
by a sy stem to its surr oundings, the less or dered and mor e random the sy stem is. Scientists r efer to 
the measure of randomness or disorder within a system as entropy. High entropy means high disorder 
and low energy. Molecules and chemical reactions have varying entropy as well. For example, entropy 
132  LISA BAR TEE AND CHRISTINE ANDERSON


[Page 139]
increases as molecules at a high concentration in one place diffuse and spread out. The second law of 
thermodynamics says that energy will al ways be lost as heat in energy transf ers or transf ormations. 
Living things are highly ordered, requiring constant energy input to be maintained in a state of lo w 
entropy. 
REFERENCES 
Unless otherwise noted, images on this page are licensed under CC-BY 4.0 by OpenStax. 
Text adapted fr om: OpenStax, Concepts of B iology. OpenStax CNX. M ay 18, 2016 http:// cnx.org/
contents/b3c1e1d2-839c-42b0-a314-e119a8aafbdd@9.10 
An interactive or media element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view it online here: 
https://openoregon.pressbooks.pub/mhccbiology101/?p=251 
An interactive or media element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view it online here: 
https://openoregon.pressbooks.pub/mhccbiology101/?p=251 
An interactive or media element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view it online here: 
https://openoregon.pressbooks.pub/mhccbiology101/?p=251 
MHCC BI101   133


[Page 140]
CHAPTER 40 . 
ENZYMES 
A substance that helps a chemical reaction to occur is called a catalyst, and the molecules that catalyze 
biochemical reactions are called enzymes. Most enzymes ar e proteins and perf orm the critical task 
of speeding up chemical r eactions inside the cell. M ost of the r eactions critical to a living cell 
happen too slowly at normal temperatures to be of an y use to the cell. W ithout enzymes to speed up 
these reactions, life could not persist. Enzymes speed up these r eactions by binding to the r eactant 
molecules and holding them in such a w ay as to mak e the chemical bond-br eaking and - forming 
processes take place more easily. 
It is important to r emember that enzymes do not change w hether a r eaction is ex ergonic 
(spontaneous) or endergonic. This is because they do not change the amount of energy pr esent in the 
reactants or products. They only reduce the activation energy required for the reaction to go forward 
(Figure 1). Activation energy is the amount of energy r equired for a r eaction to pr oceed. Heating a 
chemical reaction adds energy , which can pr ovide the needed activ ation energy. However, heating 
chemical reactions to the temperatur e at w hich they will pr oceed is not an option f or cells. Instead, 
cells use enzymes that work by lowering the energy required to make the reaction happen. 
An enzyme is unchanged b y the r eaction it catal yzes. Once one r eaction has been catal yzed, the 
enzyme is able to participate in other r eactions. Cells do not ha ve to make a new enzyme ev ery time 
they want to perform a specific chemical reaction. 
134  LISA BAR TEE AND CHRISTINE ANDERSON


[Page 141]
Figure 1 Enzymes lower the activation energy of the reaction 
but do not change the free energy of the reaction. 
The chemical r eactants to w hich an enzyme binds ar e called the enzyme’ s substrates. Ther e ma y 
be one or mor e substrates, depending on the particular chemical r eaction. In some r eactions, a 
single reactant substrate is broken down into multiple products. In others, two substrates may come 
together to cr eate one larger molecule. T wo reactants might also enter a r eaction and both become 
modified, but they lea ve the r eaction as tw o pr oducts. The location within the enzyme w here the 
substrate binds is called the enzyme’ s active site. The active site is where the “action” happens. Since 
enzymes ar e pr oteins, ther e is a unique combination of amino acid side chains within the activ e 
site. Each side chain is characterized b y diff erent pr operties. They can be large or small, w eakly 
acidic or basic, h ydrophilic or hydrophobic, positively or negatively charged, or neutral. The unique 
combination of side chains cr eates a very specific chemical en vironment within the activ e site. This 
specific environment is suited to bind to one specific chemical substrate (or substrates). 
MHCC BI101   135


[Page 142]
Figure 2 The substrate binds to the enzyme at the active site. Credit: Induced Fit Model; Stephjc; wikimedia; public 
domain. 
For many years, scientists thought that enzyme-substrate binding took p lace in a simp le “lock and 
key” fashion. This model asserted that the enzyme and substrate fit together perf ectly in one 
instantaneous step. H owever, current research supports a model called induced fit (Figure 4). The 
induced-fit model expands on the lock -and-key model b y describing a mor e dynamic binding 
between enzyme and substrate. As the enzyme and substrate come together , their interaction causes 
a slight shift in the enzyme’s structure that forms an ideal binding arrangement between enzyme and 
substrate. 
When an enzyme binds its substrate, an enzyme-substrate comp lex is f ormed. This comp lex lowers 
the activation energy of the r eaction and pr omotes its rapid pr ogression in one of multip le possible 
ways: 
• On a basic level, enzymes promote chemical reactions that involve more than one substrate by 
bringing the substrates together in an optimal orientation for reaction. 
• Enzymes promote the reaction of their substrates is by creating an optimal environment within 
the active site for the reaction to occur. The chemical properties that emerge from the particular 
arrangement of amino acids within an active site create the perfect environment for an enzyme’s 
specific substrates to react. 
• The enzyme-substrate complex can also lower activation energy by compromising the bond 
structure so that it is easier to break. 
• Finally, enzymes can also lower activation energies by taking part in the chemical reaction itself. In 
136  LISA BAR TEE AND CHRISTINE ANDERSON


[Page 143]
these cases, it is important to remember that the enzyme will always return to its original state by 
the completion of the reaction. 
One of the hallmark properties of enzymes is that they remain ultimately unchanged by the reactions 
they catalyze. After an enzyme has catal yzed a r eaction, it r eleases its pr oduct(s) and can catal yze a 
new reaction. 
Figure 4 The induced-fit model is an adjustment to the lock-and-key model and explains how enzymes and substrates undergo dynamic 
modifications during the transition state to increase the affinity of the substrate for the active site. 
It would seem ideal to ha ve a scenario in w hich all of an organism ’s enzymes existed in abundant 
supply and functioned optimall y under all cellular conditions, in all cells, at all times. H owever, a 
variety of mechanisms ensur es that this does not happen. Cellular needs and conditions constantl y 
vary from cell to cell, and change within individual cells over time. The required enzymes of stomach 
cells diff er fr om those of fat storage cells, skin cells, blood cells, and nerv e cells. F urthermore, a 
digestive organ cell w orks much har der to pr ocess and br eak down nutrients during the time that 
closely f ollows a meal compar ed with man y hours after a meal. As these cellular demands and 
conditions vary, so must the amounts and functionality of different enzymes. 
Since the rates of biochemical r eactions are controlled by activation energy, and enzymes lo wer and 
determine activ ation energies f or chemical r eactions, the r elative amounts and functioning of the 
variety of enzymes within a cell ultimately determine which reactions will proceed and at what rates. 
This determination is tightl y contr olled in cells. In certain cellular en vironments, enzyme activity 
is partly controlled by environmental factors like pH, temperature, salt concentration, and, in some 
cases, cofactors or coenzymes. 
Enzymes can also be regulated in ways that either promote or reduce enzyme activity. There are many 
kinds of molecules that inhibit or pr omote enzyme function, and various mechanisms by which they 
do so. 
MHCC BI101   137


[Page 144]
• In some cases of enzyme inhibition, an inhibitor molecule is similar enough to a substrate that it 
can bind to the active site and simply block the substrate from binding. 
• In other cases, an inhibitor molecule binds to the enzyme in a location other than the active site, 
called an allosteric site, but still manages to block substrate binding to the active site. 
• There are activators as well as inhibitors. Activators bind to locations on an enzyme away from the 
active site, inducing a conformational change that increases the affinity of the enzyme’s active 
site(s) for its substrate(s) (Figure 5). 
Figure 5 Allosteric inhibition works by indirectly inducing a conformational change to the active site such that the substrate no longer fits. In 
contrast, in allosteric activation, the activator molecule modifies the shape of the active site to allow a better fit of the substrate. 
Many enzymes do not w ork optimall y, or ev en at all, unless bound to other specific non-pr otein 
helper molecules. They ma y bond either temporaril y thr ough ionic or h ydrogen bonds, or 
permanently through stronger covalent bonds. B inding to these molecules pr omotes optimal shape 
and function of their r espective enzymes. T wo examp les of these types of helper molecules ar e 
cofactors and coenzymes. Cofactors are inorganic ions such as ions of iron and magnesium. Coenzymes 
are organic helper molecules, those with a basic atomic structur e made up of carbon and h ydrogen. 
Like enzymes, these molecules participate in r eactions without being changed themsel ves and ar e 
ultimately r ecycled and r eused. V itamins ar e the sour ce of coenzymes. Some vitamins ar e the 
precursors of coenzymes and others act dir ectly as coenzymes. V itamin C is a dir ect coenzyme f or 
multiple enzymes that tak e part in building the important connectiv e tissue, collagen. Ther efore, 
138  LISA BAR TEE AND CHRISTINE ANDERSON


[Page 145]
enzyme function is, in part, r egulated by the abundance of v arious cofactors and coenzymes, w hich 
may be supplied by an organism’s diet or, in some cases, produced by the organism. 
REFERENCES 
Unless otherwise noted, images on this page are licensed under CC-BY 4.0 by OpenStax. 
Text adapted fr om: OpenStax, Concepts of B iology. OpenStax CNX. M ay 18, 2016 http:// cnx.org/
contents/b3c1e1d2-839c-42b0-a314-e119a8aafbdd@9.10 
An interactive or media element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view it online here: 
https://openoregon.pressbooks.pub/mhccbiology101/?p=257 
An interactive or media element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view it online here: 
https://openoregon.pressbooks.pub/mhccbiology101/?p=257 
An interactive or media element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view it online here: 
https://openoregon.pressbooks.pub/mhccbiology101/?p=257 
MHCC BI101   139


[Page 146]
CHAPTER 41 . 
CHANGES IN ENZYME ACTIVITY 
It would seem ideal to ha ve a scenario in w hich all of an organism ’s enzymes existed in abundant 
supply and functioned optimally under all cellular conditions, in all cells, at all times. H owever, there 
are several reasons that this does not happen. Cellular needs and conditions constantly vary from cell 
to cell, and change within individual cells o ver time. The r equired enzymes of stomach cells diff er 
from those of fat storage cells, skin cells, blood cells, and nerv e cells. Furthermore, a digestive organ 
cell works much har der to pr ocess and br eak down nutrients during the time that closel y follows a 
meal compared with many hours after a meal. As these cellular demands and conditions vary, so must 
the amounts and functionality of different enzymes. 
Since the rates of biochemical r eactions are controlled by activation energy, and enzymes lo wer and 
determine activ ation energies f or chemical r eactions, the r elative amounts and functioning of the 
variety of enzymes within a cell ultimately determine which reactions will proceed and at what rates. 
This determination is tightly controlled in cells. 
REGULA TION 
Enzymes can be r egulated in w ays that either pr omote or r educe enzyme activity . There are many 
kinds of molecules that inhibit or pr omote enzyme function, and various mechanisms by which they 
do so. 
• In some cases of enzyme inhibition, an inhibitor molecule is similar enough to a substrate that it 
can bind to the active site and simply block the substrate from binding. 
• In other cases, an inhibitor molecule binds to the enzyme in a location other than the active site, 
called an allosteric site, but still manages to block substrate binding to the active site. 
• There are activators as well as inhibitors. Activators bind to locations on an enzyme away from the 
active site, inducing a conformational change that increases the affinity of the enzyme’s active 
site(s) for its substrate(s) (Figure 1). 
140  LISA BAR TEE AND CHRISTINE ANDERSON


[Page 147]
Figure 1 Allosteric inhibition works by indirectly inducing a conformational change to the active site such that the substrate no longer fits. In 
contrast, in allosteric activation, the activator molecule modifies the shape of the active site to allow a better fit of the substrate. 
COF ACT ORS AND COENZYMES 
Many enzymes do not w ork optimall y, or ev en at all, unless bound to other specific non-pr otein 
helper molecules. They ma y bond either temporaril y thr ough ionic or h ydrogen bonds, or 
permanently through stronger covalent bonds. B inding to these molecules pr omotes optimal shape 
and function of their r espective enzymes. T wo examp les of these types of helper molecules ar e 
cofactors and coenzymes. Cofactors are inorganic ions such as ions of iron and magnesium. Coenzymes 
are organic helper molecules, those with a basic atomic structur e made up of carbon and h ydrogen. 
Like enzymes, these molecules participate in r eactions without being changed themsel ves and ar e 
ultimately r ecycled and r eused. V itamins ar e the sour ce of coenzymes. Some vitamins ar e the 
precursors of coenzymes and others act dir ectly as coenzymes. V itamin C is a dir ect coenzyme f or 
multiple enzymes that tak e part in building the important connectiv e tissue, collagen. Ther efore, 
enzyme function is, in part, r egulated by the abundance of v arious cofactors and coenzymes, w hich 
may be supplied by an organism’s diet or, in some cases, produced by the organism. 
DENA TURING 
Increasing the en vironmental temperatur e generall y incr eases r eaction rates, enzyme-catal yzed or 
otherwise. However, temperatures outside of an optimal range r educe the rate at w hich an enzyme 
MHCC BI101   141


[Page 148]
catalyzes a r eaction. H ot temperatur es will ev entually cause enzymes to denature, an irr eversible 
change in the three-dimensional shape and therefore the function of the enzyme (Figure 2). Enzymes 
are also suited to function best within a certain p H and salt concentration range, and, as with 
temperature, extreme pH, and salt concentrations can cause enzymes to denature. 
Figure 2 Heat applied to an egg during cooking irreversibly 
denatures the proteins. (credit: “K-Wall”/Flickr) 
For examp le, the enzyme am ylase is f ound in saliv a, w here it functions to br eak do wn star ch ( a 
polysaccharide – carboh ydrate chain) into smaller sugars. N ote that in this examp le, amylase is the 
enzyme, star ch is the substrate, and smaller sugars ar e the pr oduct. The p H of saliv a is typicall y 
between 6.2 and 7.6, with r oughly 6.7 being the a verage. The optimum pH of amylase is between 6.7 
and 7.0, which is close to neutral (F igure 3). The optimum temperatur e for amylase is close to 37ºC 
(which is human body temperature). 
142  LISA BAR TEE AND CHRISTINE ANDERSON


[Page 149]
Figure 2 The effect of pH and temperature on the activity of an enzyme. Amylase is shown in blue in both graphs. (top) Amylase (blue) has an 
optimum pH of about 7. The green enzyme, which has an optimum pH of about 2.3, might function in the stomach where it is very acidic. 
(bottom) Amylase (blue) has an optimum temperature of about 37 degrees C. The orange enzyme, which has an optimum temperature of 
about 15 degrees C (about 60F) might function in a plant found outdoors. Credit: Lisa Bartee, Public Domain, 2019 
MHCC BI101   143


[Page 150]
REFERENCES 
Unless otherwise noted, images on this page are licensed under CC-BY 4.0 by OpenStax. 
Text adapted fr om: OpenStax, Concepts of B iology. OpenStax CNX. M ay 18, 2016 http:// cnx.org/
contents/b3c1e1d2-839c-42b0-a314-e119a8aafbdd@9.10 
An interactive or media element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view it online here: 
https://openoregon.pressbooks.pub/mhccbiology101/?p=573 
An interactive or media element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view it online here: 
https://openoregon.pressbooks.pub/mhccbiology101/?p=573 
144  LISA BAR TEE AND CHRISTINE ANDERSON


[Page 151]
CHAPTER 42 . 
FEEDBA CK INHIBITION IN MET ABOLIC PATHW AYS 
Molecules can regulate enzyme function in many ways. The major question remains, however: What 
are these molecules and w here do they come fr om? Some are cofactors and coenzymes, as y ou have 
learned. What other molecules in the cell provide enzymatic regulation such as allosteric modulation, 
and competitiv e and non-competitiv e inhibition? P erhaps the most r elevant sour ces of r egulatory 
molecules, with r espect to enzymatic cellular metabolism, ar e the products of the cellular metabolic 
reactions themselves. In a most efficient and elegant w ay, cells ha ve evolved to use the pr oducts of 
their o wn r eactions f or f eedback inhibition of enzyme activity . Feedback inhibiti on involves the 
use of a r eaction product to r egulate its o wn further pr oduction (Figure 1). The cell r esponds to an 
abundance of the products by slowing down production during anabolic or catabolic reactions. Such 
reaction products may inhibit the enzymes that catal yzed their production through the mechanisms 
described above. 
Figure 1 Metabolic pathways are a series of reactions catalyzed 
by multiple enzymes. Feedback inhibition, where the end 
product of the pathway inhibits an upstream process, is an 
important regulatory mechanism in cells. 
The pr oduction of both amino acids and nucleotides is contr olled thr ough f eedback inhibition. 
Additionally, A TP is an allosteric r egulator of some of the enzymes in volved in the catabolic 
breakdown of sugar , the pr ocess that cr eates ATP. In this w ay, w hen ATP is in abundant supp ly, 
the cell can pr event the pr oduction of A TP. On the other hand, AD P serves as a positiv e allosteric 
regulator (an allosteric activator) for some of the same enzymes that are inhibited by ATP. Thus, when 
relative levels of ADP are high compared to ATP, the cell is trigger ed to produce more ATP through 
sugar catabolism. 
REFERENCES 
Unless otherwise noted, images on this page are licensed under CC-BY 4.0 by OpenStax. 
MHCC BI101   145


[Page 152]
Text adapted fr om: OpenStax, Concepts of B iology. OpenStax CNX. M ay 18, 2016 http:// cnx.org/
contents/b3c1e1d2-839c-42b0-a314-e119a8aafbdd@9.10 
146  LISA BAR TEE AND CHRISTINE ANDERSON


[Page 153]
PAR T VII . 
HOW CELLS OBTAIN ENER GY 
Learning Objectives 
By the end of this section, you will begin to be able to: 
• Compare energy-generating processes within different types of cells. 
References 
Unless otherwise noted, images on this page are licensed under CC-BY 4.0 by OpenStax. 
Text adapted fr om: OpenStax, Concepts of B iology. OpenStax CNX. M ay 18, 2016 http:// cnx.org/
contents/b3c1e1d2-839c-42b0-a314-e119a8aafbdd@9.10


[Page 155]
CHAPTER 43 . 
ENER GY IN LIVING SYSTEMS 
All living organisms r equire energy to perf orm their life processes. Energy, as you learned earlier in 
the chapter about enzymes, is the ability to do work or to create some kind of change. You are familiar 
with or have learned about many processes so far that can require energy: 
• Movement 
• Reproduction 
• Maintaining homeostasis of many different conditions 
• Acquiring and digesting food 
• Producing proteins 
Just as living things must continuall y consume f ood to r eplenish their energy supp lies, cells must 
continually pr oduce mor e energy to r eplenish that used b y the man y energy -requiring chemical 
reactions that constantly take place. Together, all of the chemical reactions that take place inside cells, 
including those that consume or generate energy, are referred to as the cell’s metabolism. 
A living cell cannot stor e significant amounts of fr ee energy. Free energy is energy that is not stor ed 
in molecules. Excess free energy would result in an increase of heat in the cell, which would denature 
enzymes and other proteins, and destroy the cell. Instead, a cell must be able to store energy safely and 
release it for use only as needed. Living cells accomplish this using ATP, which can be used to fill any 
energy need of the cell. How? It functions as a rechargeable battery. 
When ATP is br oken down, energy is r eleased. This energy is used b y the cell to do w ork, usually 
by the binding of the r eleased phosphate to another molecule, thus activ ating it. For example, in the 
mechanical work of muscle contraction, ATP supplies energy to move the contractile muscle proteins. 
ATP STR UCTURE AND FUNCTION 
ATP is a complex-looking molecule, but for our purposes you can think of it as a rechargeable battery. 
ATP, the full y charged f orm of our battery , is made up of  three p hosphates (the “TP” part of A TP) 
attached to a sugar and an adenine (the “A” part of ATP) (Figure 1). When the last phosphate is broken 
off of the A TP, energy is r eleased. The r esult is a single p hosphate and a molecule called AD P (“D” 
stands for “di” which means two). 
MHCC BI101   149


[Page 156]
Figure 1 The structure of ATP shows the basic components of a 
two-ring adenine, five-carbon ribose sugar, and three 
phosphate groups. 
A high amount of energy is required in order to recharge a molecule of ADP into ATP. This energy is 
stored in the bond between the second and third phosphates. When this bond is broken, the energy is 
released in a way that the cell can use it. 
REFERENCES 
Unless otherwise noted, images on this page are licensed under CC-BY 4.0 by OpenStax. 
Text adapted fr om: OpenStax, Concepts of B iology. OpenStax CNX. M ay 18, 2016 http:// cnx.org/
contents/b3c1e1d2-839c-42b0-a314-e119a8aafbdd@9.10 
An interactive or media element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view it online here: 
https://openoregon.pressbooks.pub/mhccbiology101/?p=262 
150  LISA BAR TEE AND CHRISTINE ANDERSON


[Page 157]
CHAPTER 44 . 
FR OM MOUTH TO MOLECULE: DIGESTION 
While plants can pr oduce their o wn energy using the pr ocess of p hotosynthesis, animals (and other 
organisms that can’t do photosynthesis) must eat to get energy fr om food molecules. Just like energy 
can be stor ed in  the chemical bond betw een the second and thir d p hosphate of an A TP molecule, 
energy can also be stored in the chemical bonds that make up food molecules. Most of the energy that 
we use comes from molecules of glucose, a simple sugar. 
Food ener gy is chemical energy  that animals (including  humans) deriv e fr om their  food and 
molecular oxygen through the process of cellular respiration. Cellular respiration involves either the 
process of joining oxygen from air with the  molecules of food (aerobic respiration) or the pr ocess of 
reorganizing the atoms within the molecules (anaerobic respiration). 
Humans and other animals need a minimum intak e of f ood energy to sustain their  metabolism and 
to drive their muscles. F oods are composed chiefl y of carbohydrates, fats, proteins, water, vitamins, 
and minerals. Carbohydrates, fats, proteins, and water represent virtually all the weight of food (90% 
of the dry w eight of f oods), with vitamins and minerals making up onl y a small per centage of the 
weight. Organisms deriv e food energy fr om carbohydrates, fats and pr oteins as w ell as fr om other 
molecules present in the diet.  Some diet components that pr ovide little or no f ood energy, such as 
water, minerals, vitamins, cholesterol, and fiber, may still be necessary to health and survival for other 
reasons. Water, minerals, vitamins, and cholesterol are not broken down (they are used by the body in 
the form in which they are absorbed) and so cannot be used for energy. Fiber, a type of carbohydrate, 
cannot be completely digested by the human body. 
After you put f ood into  your mouth, y ou begin to br eak it do wn mechanicall y using y our teeth. 
Enzymes in your saliva begin breaking the food molecules down as well. After you swallow your food, 
it is further broken down by additional enzymes in the stomach, followed by the small intestine. In the 
small intestine, the fully broken-down food is absorbed into the blood. The majority of the nutrients 
(about 95%) are absorbed in the small intestine. W ater is reabsorbed from the remaining material in 
the colon. Then the residual waste is eliminated during defecation. 
MHCC BI101   151


[Page 158]
The human digestive system. (Credit: 
Leysi24, from Wikimedia. Creative 
Commons Attribution-Share Alike 3.0 
Unported) 
Once in the bloodstream, nutrients enter individual cells. Glucose is too large to diffuse thr ough the 
cell membrane and  is typically transported inside cells b y proteins. After molecules enter a cell, the 
breakdown process to produce energy in the form of ATP can be completed. 
REFERENCES 
Wikipedia. Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License. 
152  LISA BAR TEE AND CHRISTINE ANDERSON


[Page 159]
CHAPTER 45 . 
MET ABOLISM 
An organism ’s metabolism is the sum total of all the chemical r eactions that occur within the 
organism. These chemical reactions fall into two basic categories: 
• Anabolism: building polymers (large molecules that the cell needs). 
• Catabolism: breaking down polymers to release energy. 
This means that  metabolism is composed of synthesis ( anabolism) and degradation ( catabolism) 
(Figure 1). 
Figure 1 Catabolic pathways are those that generate energy by breaking down larger molecules. Anabolic pathways are those that require 
energy to synthesize larger molecules. Both types of pathways are required for maintaining the cell’s energy balance. 
It is important to kno w that the chemical r eactions of metabolic path ways do not tak e p lace on 
their own. Each reaction step is facilitated, or catalyzed, by a protein called an enzyme. Enzymes are 
important for catalyzing all types of biological r eactions—those that r equire energy as w ell as those 
that release energy. 
Consider the metabolism of sugar . This is a classic examp le of one of the man y cellular pr ocesses 
that use and pr oduce energy. Living things consume sugars as a major energy sour ce, because sugar 
molecules have a great deal of energy stored within their bonds. For the most part, photosynthesizing 
organisms like plants produce these sugars. During photosynthesis, plants use energy (originally from 
MHCC BI101   153


[Page 160]
sunlight) to con vert carbon dio xide gas ( CO2) into sugar molecules (lik e glucose: C 6H12O6). They 
consume carbon dioxide and produce oxygen as a waste product. This reaction is summarized as: 
6 CO2 + 6 H2O –> C6H12O6 + 6 O2 
Because this process involves synthesizing an energy-storing molecule, it requires an energy input to 
proceed. 
In contrast, energy-storage molecules such as glucose ar e consumed to be br oken down to use their 
energy. The reaction that harvests the energy of a sugar molecule in cells requiring oxygen to survive 
can be summarized b y the r everse reaction to p hotosynthesis. In this r eaction, oxygen is consumed 
and carbon dioxide is released as a waste product. The reaction is summarized as: 
C6H12O6 + 6 O2 –> 6 CO2 + 6 H2O 
Both of these reactions involve many steps. 
The processes of making and br eaking down sugar molecules illustrate tw o examples of metabolic 
pathways. A metabolic pathway is a series of chemical r eactions that tak es a starting molecule and 
modifies it, step-b y-step, thr ough a series of metabolic intermediates, ev entually yielding a final 
product. In the examp le of sugar metabolism, the first metabolic path way synthesized sugar fr om 
smaller molecules, and the other pathway broke sugar down into smaller molecules. 
REFERENCES 
Unless otherwise noted, images on this page are licensed under CC-BY 4.0 by OpenStax. 
Text adapted fr om: OpenStax, Concepts of B iology. OpenStax CNX. M ay 18, 2016 http:// cnx.org/
contents/b3c1e1d2-839c-42b0-a314-e119a8aafbdd@9.10 
An interactive or media element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view it online here: 
https://openoregon.pressbooks.pub/mhccbiology101/?p=388 
154  LISA BAR TEE AND CHRISTINE ANDERSON


[Page 161]
CHAPTER 46 . 
AN OVERVIEW OF CELLULAR RESPIRA TION 
Glucose and other molecules fr om food are broken down to r elease energy in a comp lex series of 
chemical reactions that together are called cellular respiration. 
Cellular r espiration is a set of metabolic r eactions and pr ocesses that tak e p lace in the cells of 
organisms to con vert biochemical energy fr om nutrients into A TP, and then r elease waste 
products. The reactions involved in r espiration are catabolic reactions, which break large molecules 
into smaller ones, releasing energy in the process. These processes require a large number of enzymes 
which each perform one specific chemical reaction. 
AER OBIC RESPIRA TION 
Aerobic respiration requires oxygen. This is the reason why we breathe oxygen in from the air. This 
type of respiration releases a large amount of energy from glucose that can be stored as ATP. Aerobic 
respiration happens all the time in animals and p lants, w here most of the r eactions occur in the 
mitochondria. Even some pr okaryotes can perf orm aerobic respiration (although since pr okaryotes 
don’t contain mitochondria, the r eactions ar e slightl y diff erent). The o verall chemical f ormula f or 
aerobic respiration can be written as: 
C6H12O2 + 6 O2 → 6 CO2 + 6 H2O + (approximately) 38 ATP 
Translating that formula into English: One molecule of glucose can be br oken down in the pr esence 
of oxygen gas to pr oduce waste products of carbon dio xide (which we breathe out) and w ater. This 
process has an overall release of energy which is captured and stored in 38 molecules of ATP. 
ANAER OBIC RESPIRA TION 
Anaerobic respiration occurs in the absence of oxygen. It releases a much smaller amount of energy 
than aerobic respiration. Anaerobic respiration does not release enough energy to power human cells 
for long – think about how long a person can live if they are not able to breathe. Anaerobic respiration 
occurs in muscle cells during hard exercise (after the oxygen has been used up). It also occurs in yeast 
when brewing beer. Many prokaryotes perform anaerobic respiration. 
There are several different types of anaerobic respiration, which will be discussed in more detail later. 
For now, we will summarize them all using this chemical formula: 
C6H12O2  NAD+ → various waste products + NADH + 2 ATP 
MHCC BI101   155


[Page 162]
AER OBIC VS  ANAER OBIC RESPIRA TION 
Aerobic Anaerobic 
Requires oxygen? Yes No 
Glucose breakdown Complete Incomplete 
End products CO2 and H2O 
Animal cells: lactic acid 
Plant cells and yeast: carbon dioxide and ethanol 
ATP produced About 36 2 
Aerobic respiration is much mor e efficient than anaer obic respiration. One molecule of glucose can 
generate up to 38 molecules of ATP if aerobic respiration is used. In contrast, only 2 molecules of ATP 
are generated in anaerobic respiration. 
To put it another way, a cellular process which requires 100 molecules of ATP: 
• Will require about 2.5 molecules of glucose to be broken down using aerobic respiration (100 / 38 
= 2.63) 
• Will require 50 molecules of glucose to be broken down using anaerobic respiration (100 / 2 = 50) 
REFERENCES 
Wikipedia. 
An interactive or media element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view it online here: 
https://openoregon.pressbooks.pub/mhccbiology101/?p=392 
156  LISA BAR TEE AND CHRISTINE ANDERSON


[Page 163]
CHAPTER 47 . 
AER OBIC RESPIRA TION: GLYCOLYSIS 
You ha ve r ead that nearl y all of the energy used b y living things comes to them in the bonds of 
the sugar, glucose. Glycolysis is the first step in the br eakdown of glucose to extract energy f or cell 
metabolism. Many living organisms carry out gl ycolysis as part of their metabolism. Gl ycolysis takes 
place in the cytoplasm of most prokaryotic and all eukaryotic cells. 
Glycolysis begins with a molecule of glucose ( C6H12O6). Various enzymes are used to br eak glucose 
down into tw o molecules of p yruvate (basicall y a glucose molecule br oken in half ). This pr ocess 
releases a small amount of energy. 
Glycolysis consists of tw o distinct p hases. In the first part of the gl ycolysis pathway, energy is used 
to make adjustments so that the six-carbon sugar molecule can be sp lit evenly into two three-carbon 
pyruvate molecules. In the second part of gl ycolysis, ATP and nicotinamide-adenine dinucleotide 
(NADH) are produced (Figure 1). 
If the cell cannot catabolize the p yruvate molecules further , it will harv est only two ATP molecules 
from one molecule of glucose. F or example, mature mammalian r ed blood cells ar e only capable of 
glycolysis, which is their sole sour ce of ATP. If glycolysis is interrupted, these cells w ould eventually 
die. 
MHCC BI101   157


[Page 164]
Figure 1 In glycolysis, a glucose molecule is 
converted into two pyruvate molecules. 
REFERENCES 
Unless otherwise noted, images on this page are licensed under CC-BY 4.0 by OpenStax. 
Text adapted fr om: OpenStax, Concepts of B iology. OpenStax CNX. M ay 18, 2016 http:// cnx.org/
contents/b3c1e1d2-839c-42b0-a314-e119a8aafbdd@9.10 
An interactive or media element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view it online here: 
https://openoregon.pressbooks.pub/mhccbiology101/?p=265 
158  LISA BAR TEE AND CHRISTINE ANDERSON


[Page 165]
CHAPTER 48 . 
AER OBIC RESPIRA TION: THE CITRIC ACID CYCLE 
In eukary otic cells, the p yruvate molecules pr oduced at the end of gl ycolysis ar e transported into 
mitochondria. Mitochondria ar e sites of cellular r espiration; In the pr esence of o xygen, aer obic 
respiration will pr oceed. In mitochondria, p yruvate will be transf ormed into a tw o-carbon acety l 
group b y r emoving a molecule of carbon dio xide. This acety l gr oup is  picked up b y a carrier 
compound called coenzyme A ( CoA), w hich is made fr om vitamin B5. The r esulting compound 
is called acetyl Co A. ( Figure 1 ). A cetyl Co A can be used in a v ariety of w ays b y the cell, but its 
major function is to deliv er the acety l group derived from pyruvate to the next path way in glucose 
catabolism. 
Figure 1 Pyruvate is converted into acetyl-CoA before entering the citric acid cycle. 
Like the conversion of pyruvate to acetyl CoA, the citric acid cycle in eukaryotic cells takes place in 
the matrix of the mitochondria. Unlike glycolysis, the citric acid cycle is a closed loop: The last part of 
the pathway regenerates the compound used in the first step. The eight steps of the cycle are a series of 
chemical reactions that produces the following from each molecule of pyruvate (remember that there 
are 2 molecules of pyruvate produced per molecule of glucose that originally went into glycolysis): 
• 2 carbon dioxide molecules 
MHCC BI101   159


[Page 166]
• 1 ATP molecule (or an equivalent) 
• 3 NADH and 1 FADH2, which carry energy to the last part of the aerobic respiration pathway. 
Part of this is consider ed an aerobic pathway ( oxygen-requiring) because the N ADH and F ADH2 
produced must transf er their electr ons to the next path way in the sy stem, which will use o xygen. If 
oxygen is not present, this transfer does not occur. The citric acid cycle does NOT occur in anaerobic 
respiration. 
MORE DET AILS 
Two carbon atoms come into the citric acid cy cle fr om each acety l gr oup. T wo carbon dio xide 
molecules ar e r eleased on each turn of the cy cle; ho wever, these do not contain the same carbon 
atoms contributed b y the acety l gr oup on that turn of the path way. The tw o acety l-carbon atoms 
will ev entually be r eleased on later turns of the cy cle; in this w ay, all six carbon atoms fr om the 
original glucose molecule will be eventually released as carbon dioxide. It takes two turns of the cycle 
to process the equiv alent of one glucose molecule. Each turn of the cy cle forms three high-energy 
NADH molecules and one high-energy F ADH2 molecule. These high-energy carriers will connect 
with the last portion of aer obic respiration to produce ATP molecules. One ATP (or an equivalent) is 
also made in each cycle. Several of the intermediate compounds in the citric acid cycle can be used in 
synthesizing non-essential amino acids; therefore, the cycle is both anabolic and catabolic. 
REFERENCES 
Unless otherwise noted, images on this page are licensed under CC-BY 4.0 by OpenStax. 
Text adapted fr om: OpenStax, Concepts of B iology. OpenStax CNX. M ay 18, 2016 http:// cnx.org/
contents/b3c1e1d2-839c-42b0-a314-e119a8aafbdd@9.10 
An interactive or media element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view it online here: 
https://openoregon.pressbooks.pub/mhccbiology101/?p=267 
160  LISA BAR TEE AND CHRISTINE ANDERSON


[Page 167]
CHAPTER 49 . 
AER OBIC RESPIRA TION: OXID ATIVE PHOSPHORYLA TION 
You ha ve just r ead about tw o path ways in glucose catabolism—gl ycolysis and the citric acid 
cycle—that generate A TP. M ost of the A TP generated during the aer obic catabolism of glucose, 
however, is not generated directly from these pathways. Rather, it derives from a process that begins 
with passing electr ons thr ough a series of chemical r eactions to a final electr on acceptor , oxygen. 
This is the only place in aerobic respiration where O2 is actually required. These reactions take place 
in specialized pr otein complexes located in the inner membrane of the mitochondria of eukary otic 
organisms and on the inner part of the cell membrane of pr okaryotic organisms. The energy of the 
electrons is used to generate ATP. The entirety of this process is called oxidative phosphorylation. 
During oxidative phosphorylation: 
• The energy from NADH and FADH2 is used up. 
• Oxygen gas is converted into water. 
• 30-36 ATP are recharged from ADP 
MORE DET AILS 
The electron transport chain ( Figure 1a) is the last component of aer obic respiration and is the onl y 
part of metabolism that uses atmosp heric oxygen. Oxygen continuously diffuses into p lants for this 
purpose. In animals, o xygen enters the body thr ough the r espiratory sy stem. Electr on transport is 
a series of chemical r eactions that r esembles a buck et brigade in that electr ons ar e passed rapidl y 
from one component to the next, to the endpoint of the chain w here oxygen is the final electr on 
acceptor and water is produced. There are four complexes composed of proteins, labeled I through IV 
in Figure 1c, and the aggregation of these four complexes, together with associated mobile, accessory 
electron carriers, is called the electron transport chain. The electr on transport chain is pr esent in 
multiple copies in the inner mitochondrial membrane of eukary otes and in the p lasma membrane 
of pr okaryotes. In each transf er of an electr on thr ough the electr on transport chain, the electr on 
loses energy, but with some transf ers, the energy is stor ed as potential energy b y using it to pump 
hydrogen ions across the inner mitochondrial membrane into the intermembrane space, cr eating an 
electrochemical gradient. 
MHCC BI101   161


[Page 168]
Figure 1 (a) The electron transport chain is a set of molecules that supports a series of oxidation-reduction reactions. (b) ATP synthase is a 
complex, molecular machine that uses an H+ gradient to regenerate ATP from ADP. (c) Chemiosmosis relies on the potential energy provided 
by the H+ gradient across the membrane. 
Electrons from NADH and FADH2 are passed to pr otein complexes in the electr on transport chain. 
As they are passed from one complex to another (there are a total of f our), the electrons lose energy, 
and some of that energy is used to pump h ydrogen ions fr om the mitochondrial matrix into the 
intermembrane space. In the f ourth pr otein comp lex, the electr ons ar e accepted b y o xygen, the 
terminal acceptor . The o xygen with its extra electr ons then combines with tw o h ydrogen ions, 
further enhancing the electrochemical gradient, to form water. If there were no oxygen present in the 
162  LISA BAR TEE AND CHRISTINE ANDERSON


[Page 169]
mitochondrion, the electrons could not be removed from the system, and the entire electron transport 
chain would back up and stop. The mitochondria w ould be unable to generate new A TP in this way, 
and the cell would ultimately die from lack of energy. This is the r eason we must breathe to draw in 
new oxygen. 
In the electron transport chain, the fr ee energy from the series of r eactions just described is used to 
pump hydrogen ions across the membrane. The uneven distribution of H+ ions across the membrane 
establishes an electr ochemical gradient, o wing to the H+ ions’ positiv e charge and their higher 
concentration on one side of the membrane. 
Hydrogen ions diffuse thr ough the inner membrane thr ough an integral membrane pr otein called 
ATP synthase (Figure 1b). This comp lex protein acts as a tin y generator, turned b y the f orce of the 
hydrogen ions diffusing thr ough it, do wn their electr ochemical gradient fr om the intermembrane 
space, where there are many mutually repelling hydrogen ions to the matrix, where there are few. The 
turning of the parts of this molecular machine regenerate ATP from ADP. This flow of hydrogen ions 
across the membrane through ATP synthase is called chemiosmosis. 
Chemiosmosis (Figure 1c) is used to generate 90 per cent of the A TP made during aer obic glucose 
catabolism. The r esult of the r eactions is the pr oduction of A TP fr om the energy of the electr ons 
removed from hydrogen atoms. These atoms w ere originally part of a glucose molecule. A t the end 
of the electr on transport sy stem, the electr ons ar e used to r educe an o xygen molecule to o xygen 
ions. The extra electr ons on the o xygen ions attract h ydrogen ions (pr otons) from the surr ounding 
medium, and w ater is f ormed. The electr on transport chain and the pr oduction of A TP thr ough 
chemiosmosis are collectively called oxidative phosphorylation. 
REFERENCES 
Unless otherwise noted, images on this page are licensed under CC-BY 4.0 by OpenStax. 
Text adapted fr om: OpenStax, Concepts of B iology. OpenStax CNX. M ay 18, 2016 http:// cnx.org/
contents/b3c1e1d2-839c-42b0-a314-e119a8aafbdd@9.10 
An interactive or media element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view it online here: 
https://openoregon.pressbooks.pub/mhccbiology101/?p=269 
An interactive or media element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view it online here: 
https://openoregon.pressbooks.pub/mhccbiology101/?p=269 
MHCC BI101   163


[Page 170]
CHAPTER 50 . 
FERMENT ATION: AN ANAER OBIC PR OCESS 
In aerobic respiration, the final electr on acceptor is an o xygen molecule, O 2. If aer obic respiration 
occurs, then approximately 38 molecules of ATP will be produced using the energy of the high-energy 
electrons carried by NADH or FADH2 to the electron transport chain. If aerobic respiration does not 
occur, NADH must be reoxidized to NAD+ for reuse as an electron carrier for glycolysis to continue. 
How is this done? 
• Some organisms use an organic molecule (such as methane) as the final electron acceptor instead 
of oxygen. Processes that use an organic molecule to regenerate NAD+ from NADH are 
collectively referred to as fermentation. 
• In contrast, some living systems use an inorganic molecule (such as nitrate or sulfur) as a final 
electron acceptor to regenerate NAD+. 
Both of these methods ar e anaer obic ( do not r equire o xygen) to achiev e N AD+ regeneration and 
enable organisms to convert energy for their use in the absence of oxygen. 
LA CTIC ACID FERMENT ATION 
The f ermentation method used b y animals and some bacteria lik e those in y ogurt is lactic acid 
fermentation (Figure 1). This occurs r outinely in mammalian r ed blood cells and in sk eletal muscle 
that does not ha ve enough oxygen to allow aerobic respiration to continue ( such as in muscles after 
hard ex ercise). In muscles, lactic acid pr oduced b y f ermentation must be r emoved b y the blood 
circulation and br ought to the liv er f or further metabolism. The chemical r eaction of lactic acid 
fermentation is the following: 
The build-up of lactic acid causes muscle stiffness and fatigue. Once the lactic acid has been r emoved 
from the muscle and is cir culated to the liv er, it can be con verted back to p yruvic acid and further 
catabolized for energy. 
Pyruvic acid + NADH ↔ lactic acid + NAD+ 
164  LISA BAR TEE AND CHRISTINE ANDERSON


[Page 171]
Figure 1 Lactic acid fermentation is common in 
muscles that have become exhausted by use. 
AL COHOL FERMENT ATION 
Another familiar fermentation process is alcohol fermentation (Figure 2), which produces ethanol, an 
alcohol. The alcohol fermentation reaction is the following: 
Figure 2 The reaction resulting in alcohol fermentation is 
shown. 
The fermentation of pyruvic acid by yeast produces the ethanol found in alcoholic beverages (Figure 
3). If the carbon dio xide produced by the reaction is not v ented from the fermentation chamber, for 
example in beer and sparkling wines, it remains dissolved in the medium until the pressure is released. 
Ethanol above 12 percent is toxic to yeast, so natural levels of alcohol in wine occur at a maximum of 
12 percent. 
MHCC BI101   165


[Page 172]
Figure 3 Fermentation of grape juice to make wine produces 
CO2 as a byproduct. Fermentation tanks have valves so that 
pressure inside the tanks can be released. 
REFERENCES 
Unless otherwise noted, images on this page are licensed under CC-BY 4.0 by OpenStax. 
Text adapted fr om: OpenStax, Concepts of B iology. OpenStax CNX. M ay 18, 2016 http:// cnx.org/
contents/b3c1e1d2-839c-42b0-a314-e119a8aafbdd@9.10 
An interactive or media element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view it online here: 
https://openoregon.pressbooks.pub/mhccbiology101/?p=273 
An interactive or media element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view it online here: 
https://openoregon.pressbooks.pub/mhccbiology101/?p=273 
166  LISA BAR TEE AND CHRISTINE ANDERSON


[Page 173]
CHAPTER 51 . 
MET ABOLISM OF MOLECULES OTHER THAN GLUCOSE 
You have learned about the catabolism of glucose, w hich provides energy to living cells. But living 
things consume more than just glucose for food. How does a turkey sandwich, which contains various 
carbohydrates, lipids, and protein, provide energy to your cells? 
Basically, all of these molecules fr om food are converted into molecules that can enter the cellular 
respiration pathway somewhere. Some molecules enter at gl ycolysis, while others enter at the citric 
acid cy cle. This means that all  of the catabolic path ways f or carboh ydrates, pr oteins, and lipids 
eventually connect into gl ycolysis and the citric acid cy cle pathways (Figure 1). Metabolic pathways 
should be thought of as por ous—that is, substances enter from other pathways, and other substances 
leave for other pathways. These pathways are not closed systems. Many of the products in a particular 
pathway are reactants in other pathways. 
CARBOHYDRA TES 
So far, we have discussed the carbohydrate from which organisms derive the majority of their energy: 
glucose. Many carbohydrate molecules can be broken down into glucose or otherwise processed into 
glucose b y the body . Glycogen, a pol ymer of glucose, is a short -term energy storage molecule in 
animals. When there is plenty of ATP present, the extra glucose is converted into glycogen for storage. 
Glycogen is made and stor ed in the liv er and muscle. Gl ycogen will be tak en out of storage if blood 
sugar levels drop. The pr esence of gl ycogen in muscle cells as a sour ce of glucose allo ws ATP to be 
produced for a longer time during exercise. 
MHCC BI101   167


[Page 174]
Figure 1 Glycogen is made of many molecules of 
glucose attached together into branching chains. 
Each of the balls in the bottom diagram 
represents one molecule of glucose. (Credit: 
Glycogen by BorisTM. This work has been 
released into the public domain) 
Most other carboh ydrates enter the cellular r espiration path way during gl ycolysis. F or examp le, 
sucrose is a disaccharide made fr om glucose and fructose bonded together . Sucrose is broken down 
in the small intestine. The glucose enters the beginning of gl ycolysis as pr eviously discussed, w hile 
fructose can be slightly modified and enter glycolysis at the third step. Lactose, the disaccharide sugar 
found in milk, can be broken down by lactase enzyme into two smaller sugars: galactose and glucose. 
Like fructose, galactose can be slightly modified to enter glycolysis. 
Because these carboh ydrates enter near the beginning of gl ycolysis, their  catabolism (br eakdown) 
produces the same number of ATP molecules as glucose. 
PR OTEINS 
Proteins are broken down by a variety of enzymes in cells. Most of the time, amino acids are recycled 
into new pr oteins and not used as a sour ce of energy . This is because it is mor e energy efficient to 
reuse amino acids rather than making new ones fr om scratch. The body will use pr otein as a sour ce 
of energy if: 
• There are excess amino acids (you consume a lot of protein) 
• The body is in a state of famine (you are starving and have no other source of energy available) 
When proteins are used in the cellular respiration pathway, they are first broken down into individual 
amino acids. The amino gr oup from each amino acid is r emoved (deaminated) and is con verted into 
ammonia. In mammals, the liver synthesizes urea from two ammonia molecules and a carbon dioxide 
168  LISA BAR TEE AND CHRISTINE ANDERSON


[Page 175]
molecule. Thus, ur ea is the principal w aste pr oduct in mammals fr om the nitr ogen originating in 
amino acids, and it leaves the body in urine. 
Once the amino acid has been deaminated, its chemical pr operties determine w hich intermediate 
of the cellular r espiration path way it will be con verted into. These intermediates enter cellular 
respiration at various places in the Citric Acid Cycle. 
LIPIDS 
Triglycerides (fats) are a form of long-term energy storage in animals. Triglycerides store about twice 
as much energy as carboh ydrates. Triglycerides are made of gl ycerol and thr ee fatty acids. Gl ycerol 
can enter  glycolysis. F atty acids ar e br oken into tw o-carbon units that enter the citric acid cy cle. 
Because fatty acids are composed of long chains of carbons, and each of these can enter the citric acid 
cycle, one fatty acid molecule can generate much more ATP than one molecule of glucose. 
Figure 2 Glycogen from the liver and muscles, together with 
fats, can feed into the catabolic pathways for carbohydrates. 
REFERENCES 
Unless otherwise noted, images on this page are licensed under CC-BY 4.0 by OpenStax. 
Text adapted fr om: OpenStax, Concepts of B iology. OpenStax CNX. M ay 18, 2016 http:// cnx.org/
contents/b3c1e1d2-839c-42b0-a314-e119a8aafbdd@9.10 
An interactive or media element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view it online here: 
https://openoregon.pressbooks.pub/mhccbiology101/?p=277 
MHCC BI101   169


[Page 176]
CHAPTER 52 . 
ANAER OBIC CELLULAR RESPIRA TION 
Certain pr okaryotes, including some species of bacteria and Ar chaea, use anaer obic cellular 
respiration. This process is similar to aerobic respiration except that something other than oxygen is 
used as the final electron acceptor for the electron transport chain. For example, the group of Archaea 
called methanogens r educes carbon dio xide to methane to o xidize N ADH. These micr oorganisms 
are found in soil and in the digestiv e tracts of ruminants, such as co ws and sheep. S imilarly, sulfate-
reducing bacteria and Ar chaea, most of w hich are anaerobic (Figure 1), reduce sulfate to h ydrogen 
sulfide to regenerate NAD+ from NADH. 
Figure 1 The green color seen in these coastal waters is from an 
eruption of hydrogen sulfide. Anaerobic, sulfate-reducing 
bacteria release hydrogen sulfide gas as they decompose algae 
in the water. (credit: NASA image courtesy Jeff Schmaltz, 
MODIS Land Rapid Response Team at NASA GSFC) 
Many pr okaryotes ar e facultativ ely anaer obic. This means that they can switch betw een aer obic 
respiration and f ermentation, depending on the a vailability of o xygen. Certain pr okaryotes, lik e 
Clostridia bacteria, ar e obligate anaer obes. Obligate anaer obes liv e and gr ow in the absence of 
molecular o xygen. O xygen is a poison to these micr oorganisms and kills them upon exposur e. I t 
should be noted that all f orms of f ermentation, ex cept lactic acid f ermentation, pr oduce gas. The 
production of particular types of gas is used as an indicator of the f ermentation of specific 
170  LISA BAR TEE AND CHRISTINE ANDERSON


[Page 177]
carbohydrates, which plays a role in the laboratory identification of the bacteria. The various methods 
of fermentation are used by different organisms to ensure an adequate supply of NAD+ for the sixth 
step in glycolysis. Without these pathways, that step would not occur, and no ATP would be harvested 
from the breakdown of glucose. 
REFERENCES 
Unless otherwise noted, images on this page are licensed under CC-BY 4.0 by OpenStax. 
Text adapted fr om: OpenStax, Concepts of B iology. OpenStax CNX. M ay 18, 2016 http:// cnx.org/
contents/b3c1e1d2-839c-42b0-a314-e119a8aafbdd@9.10 
MHCC BI101   171


[Page 179]
PAR T VIII . 
PHO TOSYNTHESIS 
Learning Objectives 
By the end of this section, you will be able to: 
• Compare energy-generating processes within different types of cells. 
Figure 1 This sage thrasher’s diet, like that of almost all 
organisms, depends on photosynthesis. (credit: modification of 
work by Dave Menke, U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service) 
No matter how complex or advanced a machine, such as the latest cellular p hone, the device cannot 
function without energy . Living things, similar to machines, ha ve many complex components; they 
too cannot do an ything without energy, which is why humans and all other organisms must “ eat” in 
some form or another. That may be common knowledge, but how many people realize that every bite 
of every meal ingested depends on the process of photosynthesis?


[Page 180]
References 
Unless otherwise noted, images on this page are licensed under CC-BY 4.0 by OpenStax. 
Text adapted fr om: OpenStax, Concepts of B iology. OpenStax CNX. M ay 18, 2016 http:// cnx.org/
contents/b3c1e1d2-839c-42b0-a314-e119a8aafbdd@9.10


[Page 181]
CHAPTER 53 . 
PUTTING PHO TOSYNTHESIS INT O CONTEXT 
All living things require energy. Carbohydrates are storage molecules for energy. Living things access 
energy by breaking down carbohydrate molecules during the pr ocess of cellular r espiration.  Plants 
produce carboh ydrates during p hotosynthesis. So if p lants mak e carboh ydrate molecules during 
photosynthesis, do they also perf orm cellular r espiration? The answ er is y es, they do. Although 
energy can be stor ed in molecules lik e ATP, carbohydrates (and lipids, w hich can also enter cellular 
respiration as a source of energy) are much more stable and efficient r eservoirs for chemical energy. 
Photosynthetic organisms also carry out the r eactions of r espiration to harv est the energy that 
they have stor ed in carboh ydrates during p hotosynthesis. Plants ha ve mitochondria in addition to 
chloroplasts. 
The energy that is harnessed fr om photosynthesis enters the ecosy stems of our p lanet continuously 
and is transf erred fr om one organism to another . Ther efore, dir ectly or indir ectly, the pr ocess of 
photosynthesis provides most of the energy required by living things on earth. 
Photosynthesis also results in the release of oxygen into the atmosphere. In short, to eat and br eathe, 
humans depend almost entirely on the organisms that carry out photosynthesis. 
The overall reaction for photosynthesis: 
is the reverse of the overall reaction for cellular respiration: 
6CO2 + 6H2O →⎯ C⎯ 6H12O6 + 6O2 
6O2 + C6H12O6 → 6CO2 + 6H2O 
MHCC BI101   175


[Page 182]
Photosynthesis pr oduces o xygen as a b yproduct, and r espiration pr oduces carbon dio xide as a 
byproduct. In natur e, ther e is no such thing as w aste. E very single atom of matter is conserv ed, 
recycling indefinitely. Substances change f orm or mo ve from one type of molecule to another , but 
never disappear (Figure 1). 
CO2 is no mor e a f orm of w aste pr oduced b y r espiration than o xygen is a w aste pr oduct of 
photosynthesis. Both ar e b yproducts of r eactions that mo ve on to other r eactions. Photosynthesis 
absorbs energy fr om sunlight to build carboh ydrates in the chlor oplasts, and aer obic cellular 
respiration releases that stored energy by using oxygen to break down carbohydrates. Both organelles 
use electr on transport chains to generate the energy necessary to driv e other r eactions. 
Photosynthesis and cellular r espiration function in a biological cy cle, allowing organisms to access 
life-sustaining energy that originates millions of miles away in a star. 
Figure 1 In the carbon cycle, the reactions of photosynthesis 
and cellular respiration share reciprocal reactants and 
products. (credit: modification of work by Stuart Bassil) 
There are two basic parts of photosynthesis: the light dependent reactions and the light independent 
reactions ( also kno wn as the Cal vin cy cle). During the light r eactions, the energy fr om sunlight 
is stor ed in energy carrier molecules. These energy carrier molecules ar e then used to po wer the 
reactions of the Calvin cycle, where CO2 molecules are joined together to produce carbohydrates such 
as glucose. 
176  LISA BAR TEE AND CHRISTINE ANDERSON


[Page 183]
Figure 2 Overview of the process of photosynthesis. During the light-dependent reactions, the energy from sunlight is used by the chloroplast 
to create energy molecules: ATP and NADPH. These energy molecules power the Calvin cycle, which creates carbohydrates (G3P) from CO2. 
SOLAR DEPENDENCE AND FOOD PR ODUCTION 
Some organisms can carry out p hotosynthesis, whereas others cannot. An autotroph is an organism 
that can pr oduce its o wn f ood. The Gr eek r oots of the w ord autotroph mean “ self” ( auto) “f eeder” 
(troph). Plants are the best-known autotrophs, but others exist, including certain types of bacteria and 
algae ( Figure 1 ). Oceanic algae contribute enormous quantities of f ood and o xygen to global f ood 
chains. Plants ar e also photoautotrophs, a type of autotr oph that uses sunlight and carbon fr om 
carbon dioxide to synthesize chemical energy in the f orm of carboh ydrates. All organisms carrying 
out photosynthesis require sunlight. 
MHCC BI101   177


[Page 184]
Figure 1 (a) Plants, (b) algae, and (c) certain bacteria, called 
cyanobacteria, are photoautotrophs that can carry out 
photosynthesis. Algae can grow over enormous areas in water, 
at times completely covering the surface. (credit a: Steve 
Hillebrand, U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service; credit b: 
“eutrophication&hypoxia”/Flickr; credit c: NASA; scale-bar data 
from Matt Russell) 
Heterotrophs are organisms incapable of p hotosynthesis that must ther efore obtain energy and 
carbon fr om f ood b y consuming other organisms. The Gr eek r oots of the w ord heterotroph mean 
“other” ( hetero) “f eeder” ( troph), meaning that their f ood comes fr om other organisms. E ven if the 
food organism is another animal, this f ood traces its origins back to autotr ophs and the pr ocess of 
photosynthesis. H umans ar e heter otrophs, as ar e all animals. H eterotrophs depend on autotr ophs, 
either directly or indirectly. Deer and wolves are heterotrophs. A deer obtains energy by eating plants. 
A w olf eating a deer obtains energy that originall y came fr om the p lants eaten b y that deer . The 
energy in the plant came from photosynthesis, and therefore it is the onl y autotroph in this example 
(Figure 2). Using this reasoning, all food eaten by humans also links back to autotrophs that carry out 
photosynthesis. 
Figure 2 The energy stored in carbohydrate molecules from 
photosynthesis passes through the food chain. The predator 
that eats these deer is getting energy that originated in the 
photosynthetic vegetation that the deer consumed. (credit: 
Steve VanRiper, U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service) 
REFERENCES 
Unless otherwise noted, images on this page are licensed under CC-BY 4.0 by OpenStax. 
178  LISA BAR TEE AND CHRISTINE ANDERSON


[Page 185]
Text adapted fr om: OpenS tax, B iology. OpenS tax CNX. N ovember 11, 2017.  https://cnx.org/
contents/GFy_h8cu@10.118:W7ctJeSI@8/Overview-of-Photosynthesis 
An interactive or media element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view it online here: 
https://openoregon.pressbooks.pub/mhccbiology101/?p=280 
MHCC BI101   179


[Page 186]
CHAPTER 54 . 
LIGHT AND PIGMENTS 
How can light be used to mak e food? It is easy to think of light as something that exists and allo ws 
living organisms, such as humans, to see, but light is a form of energy. Like all energy, light can travel, 
change form, and be harnessed to do work. In the case of photosynthesis, light energy is transformed 
into chemical energy , which autotrophs use to build carboh ydrate molecules. H owever, autotrophs 
only use a specific component of sunlight (Figure 1). 
Figure 1 Autotrophs can capture light energy from 
the sun, converting it into chemical energy used to 
build food molecules. (credit: modification of work 
by Gerry Atwell, U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service) 
WHA T IS LIGHT ENER GY ? 
The sun emits an enormous amount of electromagnetic radiation (solar energy). Humans can see only 
a fraction of this energy , which is r eferred to as “visible light. ” The manner in w hich solar energy 
travels can be described and measur ed as waves. Scientists can determine the amount of energy of a 
wave by measuring its wavelength, the distance between two consecutive, similar points in a series of 
waves, such as from crest to crest or trough to trough (Figure 2). 
180  LISA BAR TEE AND CHRISTINE ANDERSON


[Page 187]
Figure 2 The wavelength of a single wave is the distance 
between two consecutive points along the wave. 
Visible light constitutes onl y one of man y types of electr omagnetic radiation emitted fr om the sun. 
The electromagnetic spectrum is the range of all possible w avelengths of radiation (Figure 3). Each 
wavelength corresponds to a different amount of energy carried. 
Figure 3 The sun emits energy in the form of electromagnetic radiation. This radiation exists in different wavelengths, each of which has its 
own characteristic energy. Visible light is one type of energy emitted from the sun. 
Each type of electr omagnetic radiation has a characteristic range of w avelengths. The longer the 
wavelength (or the more stretched out it appears), the less energy is carried. Short, tight w aves carry 
the most energy. This may seem illogical, but think of it in terms of a piece of mo ving rope. It takes 
little effort by a person to move a rope in long, wide waves. To make a rope move in short, tight waves, 
a person would need to apply significantly more energy. 
The sun emits a broad range of electromagnetic radiation, including X-rays and ultraviolet (UV) rays 
MHCC BI101   181


[Page 188]
(Figure 3) . The higher-energy waves are dangerous to living things; for example, X-rays and UV rays 
can be harmful to humans. 
ABSORPTION OF LIGHT 
Light energy enters the process of photosynthesis when pigments absorb the light. In plants, pigment 
molecules absorb only visible light for photosynthesis. The visible light seen by humans as white light 
actually exists in a rainbo w of colors. Certain objects, such as a prism or a dr op of w ater, disperse 
white light to r eveal these colors to the human ey e. The visible light portion of the electr omagnetic 
spectrum is per ceived by the human ey e as a rainbo w of colors, with violet and blue ha ving shorter 
wavelengths and, ther efore, higher energy . A t the other end of the spectrum to ward r ed, the 
wavelengths are longer and have lower energy. 
The wavelengths of light that ar e reflected from an object and bounce off ar e detected b y our ey es. 
The wavelengths of light that are absorbed by an object do not make it to our eyes. This means that the 
color an object appears is due to the w avelengths that are reflected and not those that ar e absorbed. 
For example, the app le in Figure 4 appears red (assuming you are not color -blind). This is because 
the red wavelengths of light are reflected off the apple and the other wavelengths (yellow, green, blue, 
purple) are absorbed by the apple. 
Figure 4 This apple appears red because it is reflecting the red 
wavelengths of light. Other wavelengths are absorbed by the 
apple. 
UNDERST ANDING PIGMENTS 
Different kinds of pigments exist, and each absorbs onl y certain wavelengths (colors) of visible light. 
Pigments reflect the color of the w avelengths that they cannot absorb. All p hotosynthetic organisms 
contain a pigment called chlorophyll a, which humans see as the common green color associated with 
182  LISA BAR TEE AND CHRISTINE ANDERSON


[Page 189]
plants. Chlorophyll a absorbs wavelengths from either end of the visible spectrum (blue and r ed), but 
not from green. Because green is reflected, chlorophyll appears green. 
Other pigment types include chlorophyll b (which absorbs blue and r ed-orange light ) and the 
carotenoids. Each type of pigment can be identified b y the specific pattern of w avelengths it absorbs 
from visible light, which is its absorption spectrum. 
Many photosynthetic organisms have a mixture of pigments; between them, the organism can absorb 
energy from a wider range of visible-light w avelengths. Not all p hotosynthetic organisms ha ve full 
access to sunlight. Some organisms grow underwater where light intensity decreases with depth, and 
certain wavelengths are absorbed by the water. Other organisms grow in competition for light. Plants 
on the rainforest floor must be able to absorb an y bit of light that comes thr ough, because the taller 
trees block most of the sunlight (Figure 5). 
Figure 5 Plants that commonly grow in the shade benefit from 
having a variety of light-absorbing pigments. Each pigment can 
absorb different wavelengths of light, which allows the plant to 
absorb any light that passes through the taller trees. (credit: 
Jason Hollinger) 
An interactive or media element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view it online here: 
https://openoregon.pressbooks.pub/mhccbiology101/?p=600 
An interactive or media element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view it online here: 
https://openoregon.pressbooks.pub/mhccbiology101/?p=600 
MHCC BI101   183


[Page 190]
REFERENCES 
Unless otherwise noted, images on this page are licensed under CC-BY 4.0 by OpenStax. 
Text adapted fr om: OpenStax, Concepts of B iology. OpenStax CNX. M ay 18, 2016 http:// cnx.org/
contents/b3c1e1d2-839c-42b0-a314-e119a8aafbdd@9.10 
184  LISA BAR TEE AND CHRISTINE ANDERSON


[Page 191]
CHAPTER 55 . 
LIGHT DEPENDENT REA CTIONS 
Photosynthesis tak es p lace in tw o stages: the light -dependent r eactions and the Cal vin cy cle. In 
the light-dependent reactions, which take place on a membrane inside the chlor oplast, chlorophyll 
absorbs energy fr om sunlight and then con verts it into chemical energy with the use of w ater. 
The light -dependent r eactions r elease oxygen fr om the h ydrolysis of w ater as a b yproduct. In the 
Calvin cycle, which takes place in the str oma, the chemical energy deriv ed from the light-dependent 
reactions drives both the capture of carbon in carbon dioxide molecules and the subsequent assembly 
of sugar molecules. 
The two reactions use carrier molecules to transport the energy fr om one to the other . The carriers 
that move energy from the light-dependent reactions to the Calvin cycle reactions can be thought of 
as “full” because they bring energy. After the energy is released, the “empty” energy carriers return to 
the light-dependent reactions to obtain more energy. 
THE LIGHT -DEPENDENT REA CTIONS 
The overall purpose of the light-dependent reactions is to convert light energy into chemical energy. 
This chemical energy will be used by the Calvin cycle to fuel the assembly of sugar molecules. 
The light -dependent r eactions begin in a gr ouping of pigment molecules and pr oteins called a 
photosystem. Photosy stems exist in the membranes of chlor oplasts. A pigment molecule in the 
photosystem absorbs one photon, a quantity or “packet” of light energy, at a time. 
A p hoton of light energy tra vels until it r eaches a molecule of chlor ophyll. The p hoton causes an 
electron in the chlor ophyll to become “ excited.” The energy giv en to the electr on allows it to br eak 
free from an atom of the chlor ophyll molecule. Chlorophyll is therefore said to “donate” an electron 
(Figure 1). 
To r eplace the electr on in the chlor ophyll, a molecule of w ater is sp lit. This sp litting r eleases an 
electron and r esults in the f ormation of oxygen (O2) and h ydrogen ions (H +) in the th ylakoid space. 
Technically, each breaking of a water molecule releases a pair of electr ons, and therefore can replace 
two donated electrons. 
MHCC BI101   185


[Page 192]
Figure 1 Light energy is absorbed by a chlorophyll molecule and 
is passed along a pathway to other chlorophyll molecules. The 
energy culminates in a molecule of chlorophyll found in the 
reaction center. The energy “excites” one of its electrons enough 
to leave the molecule and be transferred to a nearby primary 
electron acceptor. A molecule of water splits to release an 
electron, which is needed to replace the one donated. Oxygen 
and hydrogen ions are also formed from the splitting of water. 
The r eplacing of the electr on enables chlor ophyll to r espond to another p hoton. The o xygen 
molecules pr oduced as b yproducts find their w ay to the surr ounding en vironment. The h ydrogen 
ions play critical roles in the remainder of the light-dependent reactions. 
Keep in mind that the purpose of the light -dependent r eactions is to con vert solar energy into 
chemical carriers that will be used in the Cal vin cy cle. In eukary otes and some pr okaryotes, tw o 
photosystems exist. The first is called photosystem II, which was named for the order of its discovery 
rather than for the order of the function. 
After the p hoton hits, p hotosystem II transf ers the fr ee electr on to the first in a series of pr oteins 
inside the thylakoid membrane called the electron transport chain. As the electron passes along these 
proteins, energy from the electron fuels membrane pumps that activ ely move hydrogen ions against 
their concentration gradient fr om the str oma into the th ylakoid space. This is quite analogous to 
the process that occurs in the mitochondrion in w hich an electron transport chain pumps h ydrogen 
ions from the mitochondrial str oma across the inner membrane and into the intermembrane space, 
creating an electrochemical gradient. After the energy is used, the electr on is accepted b y a pigment 
molecule in the next photosystem, which is called photosystem I (Figure 2). 
186  LISA BAR TEE AND CHRISTINE ANDERSON


[Page 193]
Figure 2 From photosystem II, the electron travels along a 
series of proteins. This electron transport system uses the 
energy from the electron to pump hydrogen ions into the 
interior of the thylakoid. A pigment molecule in photosystem I 
accepts the electron. 
GENERA TING AN ENER GY CARRIER: ATP 
In the light-dependent reactions, energy absorbed by sunlight is stored by two types of energy-carrier 
molecules: ATP and NADPH. The energy that these molecules carry is stor ed in a bond that holds a 
single atom to the molecule. F or ATP, it is a phosphate atom, and for NADPH, it is a hydrogen atom. 
Recall that N ADH was a similar molecule that carried energy in the mitochondrion fr om the citric 
acid cycle to the electron transport chain. When these molecules release energy into the Calvin cycle, 
they each lose atoms to become the lower-energy molecules ADP and NADP+. 
The buildup of hydrogen ions in the thylakoid space forms an electrochemical gradient because of the 
difference in the concentration of protons (H+) and the difference in the charge across the membrane 
that they cr eate. This potential energy is harv ested and stor ed as chemical energy in A TP through 
chemiosmosis, the mo vement of h ydrogen ions do wn their electr ochemical gradient thr ough the 
transmembrane enzyme ATP synthase, just as in the mitochondrion. 
The h ydrogen ions ar e allo wed to pass thr ough the th ylakoid membrane thr ough an embedded 
protein comp lex called A TP synthase. This same pr otein generated A TP fr om AD P in the 
mitochondrion. The energy generated b y the h ydrogen ion str eam allows ATP synthase to attach a 
third phosphate to AD P, which forms a molecule of A TP in a pr ocess called p hotophosphorylation. 
The flow of hydrogen ions through ATP synthase is called chemiosmosis, because the ions move from 
an area of high to low concentration through a semi-permeable structure. 
GENERA TING ANO THER ENER GY CARRIER: NADPH 
The r emaining function of the light -dependent r eaction is to generate the other energy -carrier 
molecule, NADPH. As the electr on from the electr on transport chain arriv es at p hotosystem I, it is 
re-energized with another photon captured by chlorophyll. The energy from this electron drives the 
formation of NADPH from NADP+ and a hydrogen ion (H+). Now that the solar energy is stor ed in 
energy carriers, it can be used to make a sugar molecule. 
MHCC BI101   187


[Page 194]
REFERENCES 
Unless otherwise noted, images on this page are licensed under CC-BY 4.0 by OpenStax. 
Text adapted fr om: OpenStax, Concepts of B iology. OpenStax CNX. M ay 18, 2016 http:// cnx.org/
contents/b3c1e1d2-839c-42b0-a314-e119a8aafbdd@9.10 
An interactive or media element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view it online here: 
https://openoregon.pressbooks.pub/mhccbiology101/?p=284 
188  LISA BAR TEE AND CHRISTINE ANDERSON


[Page 195]
CHAPTER 56 . 
THE CALVIN CYCLE 
After the energy from the sun is converted and packaged into ATP and NADPH, the cell has the fuel 
needed to build f ood in the f orm of carbohydrate molecules. The carboh ydrate molecules made will 
have a backbone of carbon atoms. Where does the carbon come from? The carbon atoms used to build 
carbohydrate molecules comes from carbon dioxide, the gas that animals exhale with each breath. The 
Calvin cycle is the term used f or the r eactions of p hotosynthesis that use the energy stor ed by the 
light-dependent reactions to form glucose and other carbohydrate molecules. 
THE INTERWORKINGS OF THE CAL VIN CY CLE 
In p lants, carbon dio xide ( CO2) enters the chlor oplast thr ough the stomata and diffuses into the 
stroma of the chlor oplast—the site of the Cal vin cy cle r eactions w here sugar is synthesized. The 
reactions are named after the scientist who discovered them, and reference the fact that the reactions 
function as a cycle (Figure 1). 
Figure 1 Light-dependent reactions harness energy from the 
sun to produce ATP and NADPH. These energy-carrying 
molecules travel into the stroma where the Calvin cycle 
reactions take place. 
MHCC BI101   189


[Page 196]
RuBisCO is an enzyme that catal yzes a r eaction between CO2 and RuBP, which forms a six-carbon 
compound that is immediatel y converted into tw o three-carbon compounds. This pr ocess is called 
carbon fixation, because CO2 is “fixed” from its inorganic form into organic molecules. 
ATP and NADPH, which were made during the light dependent r eactions, use their stored energy to 
convert carbon dioxide into a three-carbon compound called G3P. The molecules of ADP and NAD+, 
which are low-energy molecules, return to the light-dependent reactions to be re-energized. 
One of the G3P molecules lea ves the Calvin cycle to contribute to the formation of the carbohydrate 
molecule, which is commonly glucose (C6H12O6). Because the carbohydrate molecule has six carbon 
atoms, it takes six turns of the Cal vin cycle to make one carbohydrate molecule (one for each carbon 
dioxide molecule fixed). The remaining G3P molecules regenerate RuBP, which enables the system to 
prepare for the carbon-fixation step. ATP is also used in the regeneration of RuBP. 
Figure 2 The Calvin cycle has three stages. In stage 1, the 
enzyme RuBisCO incorporates carbon dioxide into an organic 
molecule. In stage 2, the organic molecule is reduced. In stage 
3, RuBP, the molecule that starts the cycle, is regenerated so 
that the cycle can continue. 
In summary, it takes six turns of the Cal vin cycle to fix six carbon atoms fr om CO2. These six turns 
require energy input fr om 12 ATP molecules and 12 N ADPH molecules in the r eduction step and 6 
ATP molecules in the regeneration step. 
An interactive or media element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view it online here: 
https://openoregon.pressbooks.pub/mhccbiology101/?p=286 
190  LISA BAR TEE AND CHRISTINE ANDERSON


[Page 197]
REFERENCES 
Unless otherwise noted, images on this page are licensed under CC-BY 4.0 by OpenStax. 
Text adapted fr om: OpenStax, Concepts of B iology. OpenStax CNX. M ay 18, 2016 http:// cnx.org/
contents/b3c1e1d2-839c-42b0-a314-e119a8aafbdd@9.10 
An interactive or media element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view it online here: 
https://openoregon.pressbooks.pub/mhccbiology101/?p=286 
MHCC BI101   191


[Page 198]
CHAPTER 57 . 
PHO TOSYNTHESIS IN PR OKARY OTES 
The tw o parts of p hotosynthesis—the light -dependent r eactions and the Cal vin cy cle—have been 
described, as they tak e p lace in chlor oplasts. H owever, pr okaryotes, such as cy anobacteria, lack 
membrane-bound organelles. Pr okaryotic photosynthetic autotrophic organisms ha ve infoldings of 
the p lasma membrane f or chlor ophyll attachment and p hotosynthesis ( Figure 1 ). I t is her e that 
organisms like cyanobacteria can carry out photosynthesis. 
Figure 1 A photosynthetic prokaryote has infolded regions of 
the plasma membrane that function like thylakoids. Although 
these are not contained in an organelle, such as a chloroplast, 
all of the necessary components are present to carry out 
photosynthesis. (credit: scale-bar data from Matt Russell) 
An interactive or media element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view it online here: 
https://openoregon.pressbooks.pub/mhccbiology101/?p=288 
192  LISA BAR TEE AND CHRISTINE ANDERSON


[Page 199]
REFERENCES 
Unless otherwise noted, images on this page are licensed under CC-BY 4.0 by OpenStax. 
Text adapted fr om: OpenStax, Concepts of B iology. OpenStax CNX. M ay 18, 2016 http:// cnx.org/
contents/b3c1e1d2-839c-42b0-a314-e119a8aafbdd@9.10 
MHCC BI101   193