15.4 RNA Processing in Eukaryotes
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
•
Describe the different steps in RNA processing
•
Understand the significance of exons, introns, and splicing for mRNAs
•
Explain how tRNAs and rRNAs are processed
After transcription, eukaryotic pre-mRNAs must undergo several processing steps before they can be translated.
Eukaryotic (and prokaryotic) tRNAs and rRNAs also undergo processing before they can function as components in
the protein-synthesis machinery.
mRNA Processing
The eukaryotic pre-mRNA undergoes extensive processing before it is ready to be translated. Eukaryotic protein-
coding sequences are not continuous, as they are in prokaryotes. The coding sequences (exons) are interrupted by
noncoding introns, which must be removed to make a translatable mRNA. The additional steps involved in
eukaryotic mRNA maturation also create a molecule with a much longer half-life than a prokaryotic mRNA.
Eukaryotic mRNAs last for several hours, whereas the typical E. coli mRNA lasts no more than five seconds.
Pre-mRNAs are first coated in RNA-stabilizing proteins; these protect the pre-mRNA from degradation while it is
processed and exported out of the nucleus. The three most important steps of pre-mRNA processing are the
addition of stabilizing and signaling factors at the 5' and 3' ends of the molecule, and the removal of the introns
(Figure 15.11). In rare cases, the mRNA transcript can be “edited” after it is transcribed.
FIGURE 15.11 Eukaryotic pre-mRNA processing. In addition to 5’ Cap and 3’ Poly-A Tail addition, introns must be precisely removed and
exons joined to generate a functional mRNA. Nucleotides upstream (towards the 5’cap) of the translation START codon are part of the 5’
untranslated region (5’ UTR). Nucleotides downstream (towards 3’end) of the STOP codon form the 3’ UTR. Both 5’ and 3’ UTRs are
important for regulating translation initiation and mRNA stability. Credit: Rao, A., Ryan, K. Fletcher, S. and Tag, A. Department of Biology,
Texas A&M University.
EVOLUTION CONNECTION
RNA Editing in Trypanosomes
The trypanosomes are a group of protozoa that include the pathogen Trypanosoma brucei, which causes nagana in
cattle and sleeping sickness in humans throughout great areas of Africa (Figure 15.12). The trypanosome is carried
by biting flies in the genus Glossina (commonly called tsetse flies). Trypanosomes, and virtually all other eukaryotes,
have organelles called mitochondria that supply the cell with chemical energy. Mitochondria are organelles that
express their own DNA and are believed to be the remnants of a symbiotic relationship between a eukaryote and an
engulfed prokaryote. The mitochondrial DNA of trypanosomes exhibit an interesting exception to the central dogma:
their pre-mRNAs do not have the correct information to specify a functional protein. Usually, this is because the
mRNA is missing several U nucleotides. The cell performs an additional RNA processing step called RNA editing to
remedy this.
15.4 • RNA Processing in Eukaryotes
403


FIGURE 15.12 Trypanosoma brucei is the causative agent of sleeping sickness in humans. The mRNAs of this pathogen must be modified
by the addition of nucleotides before protein synthesis can occur. (credit: modification of work by Torsten Ochsenreiter)
Other genes in the mitochondrial genome encode 40- to 80-nucleotide guide RNAs. One or more of these molecules
interacts by complementary base pairing with some of the nucleotides in the pre-mRNA transcript. However, the
guide RNA has more A nucleotides than the pre-mRNA has U nucleotides with which to bind. In these regions, the
guide RNA loops out. The 3' ends of guide RNAs have a long poly-U tail, and these U bases are inserted in regions of
the pre-mRNA transcript at which the guide RNAs are looped. This process is entirely mediated by RNA molecules.
That is, guide RNAs—rather than proteins—serve as the catalysts in RNA editing.
RNA editing is not just a phenomenon of trypanosomes. In the mitochondria of some plants, almost all pre-mRNAs
are edited. RNA editing has also been identified in mammals such as rats, rabbits, and even humans. What could be
the evolutionary reason for this additional step in pre-mRNA processing? One possibility is that the mitochondria,
being remnants of ancient prokaryotes, have an equally ancient RNA-based method for regulating gene expression.
In support of this hypothesis, edits made to pre-mRNAs differ depending on cellular conditions. Although
speculative, the process of RNA editing may be a holdover from a primordial time when RNA molecules, instead of
proteins, were responsible for catalyzing reactions.
5' Capping
While the pre-mRNA is still being synthesized, a 7-methylguanosine cap is added to the 5' end of the growing
transcript by a phosphate linkage. This functional group protects the nascent mRNA from degradation. In addition,
factors involved in protein synthesis recognize the cap to help initiate translation by ribosomes.
3' Poly-A Tail
Once elongation is complete, the pre-mRNA is cleaved by an endonuclease between an AAUAAA consensus
sequence and a GU-rich sequence, leaving the AAUAAA sequence on the pre-mRNA. An enzyme called poly-A
polymerase then adds a string of approximately 200 A residues, called the poly-A tail. This modification further
protects the pre-mRNA from degradation and is also the binding site for a protein necessary for exporting the
processed mRNA to the cytoplasm.
Pre-mRNA Splicing
Eukaryotic genes are composed of exons, which correspond to protein-coding sequences (ex-on signifies that they
are expressed), and intervening sequences called introns (int-ron denotes their intervening role), which may be
involved in gene regulation but are removed from the pre-mRNA during processing. Intron sequences in mRNA do
not encode functional proteins.
The discovery of introns came as a surprise to researchers in the 1970s who expected that pre-mRNAs would
specify protein sequences without further processing, as they had observed in prokaryotes. The genes of higher
eukaryotes very often contain one or more introns. These regions may correspond to regulatory sequences;
however, the biological significance of having many introns or having very long introns in a gene is unclear. It is
possible that introns slow down gene expression because it takes longer to transcribe pre-mRNAs with lots of
404
15 • Genes and Proteins
Access for free at openstax.org


introns. Alternatively, introns may be nonfunctional sequence remnants left over from the fusion of ancient genes
throughout the course of evolution. This is supported by the fact that separate exons often encode separate protein
subunits or domains. For the most part, the sequences of introns can be mutated without ultimately affecting the
protein product.
All of a pre-mRNA’s introns must be completely and precisely removed before protein synthesis. If the process errs
by even a single nucleotide, the reading frame of the rejoined exons would shift, and the resulting protein would be
dysfunctional. The process of removing introns and reconnecting exons is called splicing (Figure 15.13). Introns are
removed and degraded while the pre-mRNA is still in the nucleus. Splicing occurs by a sequence-specific
mechanism that ensures introns will be removed and exons rejoined with the accuracy and precision of a single
nucleotide. Although the intron itself is noncoding, the beginning and end of each intron is marked with specific
nucleotides: GU at the 5' end and AG at the 3' end of the intron. The splicing of pre-mRNAs is conducted by
complexes of proteins and RNA molecules called spliceosomes.
VISUAL CONNECTION
FIGURE 15.13 Pre-mRNA splicing involves the precise removal of introns from the primary RNA transcript. The splicing process is catalyzed
by protein complexes called spliceosomes that are composed of proteins and RNA molecules called small nuclear RNAs (snRNAs).
Spliceosomes recognize sequences at the 5' and 3' end of the intron. Rao, A. and Ryan, K. Department of Biology, Texas A&M University.
Errors in splicing are implicated in cancers and other human diseases. What kinds of mutations might lead to
splicing errors? Think of different possible outcomes if splicing errors occur.
Note that more than 70 individual introns can be present, and each has to undergo the process of splicing—in
addition to 5' capping and the addition of a poly-A tail—just to generate a single, translatable mRNA molecule.
LINK TO LEARNING
See how introns are removed during RNA splicing at this website (https://openstax.org/l/RNA_splicing).
Processing of tRNAs and rRNAs
The tRNAs and rRNAs are structural molecules that have roles in protein synthesis; however, these RNAs are not
themselves translated. Pre-rRNAs are transcribed, processed, and assembled into ribosomes in the nucleolus. Pre-
tRNAs are transcribed and processed in the nucleus and then released into the cytoplasm where they are linked to
free amino acids for protein synthesis.
Most of the tRNAs and rRNAs in eukaryotes and prokaryotes are first transcribed as a long precursor molecule that
spans multiple rRNAs or tRNAs. Enzymes then cleave the precursors into subunits corresponding to each structural
RNA. Some of the bases of pre-rRNAs are methylated; that is, a –CH3 methyl functional group is added for stability.
Pre-tRNA molecules also undergo methylation. As with pre-mRNAs, subunit excision occurs in eukaryotic pre-RNAs
destined to become tRNAs or rRNAs.
15.4 • RNA Processing in Eukaryotes
405